Proceedings in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, 22 June 2018

A data-driven model order reduction approach for Stokes ﬂow through
random porous media
Constantin Grigo1,∗ and Phaedon-Stelios Koutsourelakis1,∗∗
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Boltzmannstr. 15, 85748 Garching

Direct numerical simulation of Stokes ﬂow through an impermeable, rigid body matrix by ﬁnite elements requires meshes
ﬁne enough to resolve the pore-size scale and is thus a computationally expensive task. The cost is signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed
when randomness in the pore microstructure is present and therefore multiple simulations need to be carried out. It is well
known that in the limit of scale-separation, Stokes ﬂow can be accurately approximated by Darcy’s law [1] with an effective
diffusivity ﬁeld depending on viscosity and the pore-matrix topology. We propose a fully probabilistic, Darcy-type, reduced-
order model which, based on only a few tens of full-order Stokes model runs, is capable of learning a map from the ﬁne-scale
topology to the effective diffusivity and is maximally predictive of the ﬁne-scale response. The reduced-order model learned
can signiﬁcantly accelerate uncertainty quantiﬁcation tasks as well as provide quantitative conﬁdence metrics of the predictive
estimates produced.

1

Introduction

Copyright line will be provided by the publisher

Numerical simulations of physical or engineering systems are hampered by the presence of high-dimensional uncertainties in
their input parameters, such as external loads, material- or geometric properties. Monte Carlo estimators, while dimension-
independent, can lead to a large amount of forward model evaluations which are not computationally affordable in many
cases.

A prominent approach to reduce the computational cost is by replacing the forward model by a much cheaper, yet inac-
curate surrogate or emulator trained on only a small number of forward runs. Machine learning methods such as Gaussian
Processes or Deep Neural Networks have grown into prominence but suffer from the curse of dimensionality and/or require
an excessively large amount of data to be trained.

In this work, we introduce a fully Bayesian surrogate to Stokes ﬂow through random porous media, which is utilizing
a simpliﬁed physics emulator (Darcy ﬂow) as its core unit and is therefore capable of dealing with large-dimensional input
uncertainties (thousands) whilst only requiring few (tens) forward model runs for training.

2 Methodology
2.1 The full-order model: Stokes ﬂow through random porous media

Fig. 1: FE mesh (left), pressure response p (middle) and norm of velocity ﬁeld |v| for Stokes ﬂow through a typical porous medium
realization with non-overlapping polydisperse circular exclusions.

We consider porous microstructures described as perforated unit square domains with impermeable inclusions. Assuming

unit viscosity µ = 1, the strong form of the fully resolved Stokes ﬂow problem is given by

8
1
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

1
2

 
 
]
L
M

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
1
8
0

.

6
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

−∇ · ∇v + ∇P = 0
∇ · v = 0

(1c)
(1d)
(1e)
where ΩF is the pore domain, Γp, Γv, Γint denote external Neumann, Dirichlet and interfacial (Dirichlet) boundaries and v,
P , and t are the ﬂow velocity, pressure ﬁeld and Cauchy tractions, respectively. We use Taylor-Hood elements and call
U f =

the FE solution to the pressure and velocity ﬁelds p and v evaluated on a regular 128 × 128 grid.

t = n · (∇v − IP ) = −P0n on Γp
on Γv
v = v0
on Γint
v = 0

(cid:17)

(cid:16) P f

V f

in ΩF
in ΩF

(1a)
(1b)

∗ Corresponding author: e-mail constantin.grigo@tum.de, phone +49 (89) 289 - 15218
∗∗ e-mail p.s.koutsourelakis@tum.de

Copyright line will be provided by the publisher

2

PAMM header will be provided by the publisher

2.2 A fully Bayesian reduced-order model

We propose a fully Bayesian, three-component reduced-order model [2], [3] comprising:

• a probabilistic map from the high-dimensional vector λf characterizing the random microstructure/domain (e.g. a list
of centers and radii of circular exclusions) to a much lower dimensional vector λc representing an effective diffusivity
random ﬁeld; this probabilistic mapping is denoted with pc(λc|λf , θc), where θc parametrized by θc;

• a deterministic ﬁnite element solver for Darcy’s equation,

−∇ · (λc∇Pc) = 0

(2)

mimicking Stokes ﬂow on a much coarser scale; We call P c = P c(λc) the Darcy FE pressure response and V c =
V c(λc) the corresponding ﬂux ﬁeld, both evaluated on the same grid as the ﬁne scale data;

(cid:16) P c(λc)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(cid:16) P f

V f

• a probabilistic coarse-to-ﬁne mapping from U c =
mapping pcf (U f|U c, θcf ), parametrized by θcf ;
We pursue a fully Bayesian approach and marginalize all model parameters θc, θcf to get the predictive distribution

to the ﬁne scale response U f =

V c(λc)

. We call this

p(U f|λf ) =

pcf (U f|U c(λc), θcf )pc(λc|λf , θc)pθcf (θcf )pθc (θc)dλcdθcdθcf ,

(3)

(cid:90)

where the effective Darcy diffusivity λc appears as a latent variable. Model training is performed using an adapted form of
the Variational Relevance Vector Machine [4] suitable for latent variable models.

3 Example

Fig. 2: Predictive examples on the Stokes ﬂow pressure response p for N = 8 training samples and Darcy emulator resolution 2 × 2 (left)
and N = 80 using a 4 × 4 emulator mesh (right). The blue surface is the predictive mean ± 1 standard deviation (transparent grey). The
colored surface is the true response of a test sample.

For training/testing our model, we use microstructures with totally impenetrable polydisperse spherical exclusions (see also
Figure 1). The number and radii of exclusions are sampled from a (discretized) log-normal distribution. Predictive examples
for low/high number of training data and different Darcy emulator discretizations are shown in Figure 2.

4 Conclusion

We have introduced a fully Bayesian, three-component probabilistic surrogate model for Stokes ﬂow through random porous
media using a much cheaper model emulator based on Darcy ﬂow on a much coarser spatial discretization as the key compo-
nent. Model evaluations on test samples show tight distributions centered around the true solution. Predictive errors improve
with the number of training data and with the resolution of the Darcy-based emulator.

References

[1] S. Whitaker, Transport in Porous Media 1(1), 3–25 (1986).
[2] C. Grigo and P. S. Koutsourelakis, Probabilistic Reduced-Order Modeling For Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International Conference on Uncertainty Quantiﬁcation in Computational Sciences and Engineering (UNCECOMP
2017), (Eccomas Proceedia, 2017).

[3] C. Grigo and P. S. Koutsourelakis, Bayesian model and dimension reduction for uncertainty propagation: applications in random

media, forthcoming, November 2017.

[4] C. M. Bishop and M. E. Tipping, Variational Relevance Vector Machines, in: Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Uncertainty in

Artiﬁcial Intelligence, , UAI ’00 (Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000), pp. 46–53.

Copyright line will be provided by the publisher

