1
1
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

2
1

 
 
]

A
N
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
2
3
2

.

6
0
1
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A FRAMEWORK FOR COUPLED DEFORMATION-DIFFUSION ANALYSIS

WITH APPLICATION TO DEGRADATION/HEALING

M. K. MUDUNURU AND K. B. NAKSHATRALA

Abstract. This paper deals with the formulation and numerical implementation of a fully cou-

pled continuum model for deformation-diﬀusion in linearized elastic solids. The mathematical

model takes into account the eﬀect of the deformation on the diﬀusion process, and the aﬀect of

the transport of an inert chemical species on the deformation of the solid. We then present a

robust computational framework for solving the proposed mathematical model, which consists of

coupled non-linear partial diﬀerential equations. It should be noted that many popular numerical

formulations may produce unphysical negative values for the concentration, particularly, when the

diﬀusion process is anisotropic. The violation of the non-negative constraint by these numerical

formulations is not mere numerical noise. In the proposed computational framework we employ a

novel numerical formulation that will ensure that the concentration of the diﬀusant be always non-

negative, which is one of the main contributions of this paper. Representative numerical examples

are presented to show the robustness, convergence, and performance of the proposed computational

framework. Another contribution of this paper is to systematically study the aﬀect of transport

of the diﬀusant on the deformation of the solid and vice-versa, and their implication in modeling

degradation/healing of materials. We show that the coupled response is both qualitatively and

quantitatively diﬀerent from the uncoupled response.

1. INTRODUCTION

In this paper we present a continuum mathematical model and a computational framework for

degradation/healing in elastic solids due to the presence of a solute. We shall neglect chemical

reactions as well as thermal eﬀects. We shall also assume that the strains in the solid are small.

The deformation is coupled with the diﬀusion process, and the diﬀusion process is in turn coupled

with the deformation of the solid. The chosen problem belongs to a broader class of problems,

namely, coupled deformation-diﬀusion problems.

Coupled deformation-diﬀusion problems arise in many civil engineering, material science, and

polymer science applications. An important example is degradation/healing of materials and struc-

tures. Many man-made and natural materials degrade/heal due to environmental conditions, and

structural components and superstructures are constantly exposed to adverse conditions. The fate

of the transport of a diﬀusant will in turn depend on the deformation of the solid. Some other

Key words and phrases. coupled deformation-diﬀusion analysis; non-negative solutions; maximum principles;

degradation/healing; damage mechanics; convex quadratic programming; staggered coupling algorithm.

1

examples of coupled deformation-diﬀusion problems are moisture damage in cementitious materials

[30, 31] and asphalt [11, 26], hydrogen embrittlement [51, 57], curing of ceramics [35], and swelling

of polymers and composites [58, 55].

The governing equations of a deformation-diﬀusion problem are coupled non-linear partial dif-

ferential equations. That is, the mechanical variables (strains and stresses) and diﬀusive variables

(concentration and mass ﬂux) are coupled through constitutive relations. It is (in general) not pos-

sible to obtain analytical solutions for these kinds of problems, and one has to resort to numerical

techniques to solve practical problems. Despite the importance of coupled deformation-diﬀusion

problems, there is no robust and reliable computational framework for solving such coupled prob-

lems. In particular, the existing numerical studies have one or more of the following limitations:

• considered academic and unrealistic problems like inﬁnite slabs and inﬁnite cylinders,
• did not consider anisotropic diﬀusion and/or assumed the medium to be homogeneous, or
• did not consider the fact that conventional numerical formulations and ﬁnite element pack-
ages produce unphysical negative values for the concentration in solving diﬀusion-type equa-

tions.

1.1. Maximum principles and non-negative solutions for diﬀusion-type equations. Pre-

dictive numerical simulations require accurate and reliable discretization methods. The resulting

discrete systems must inherit or mimic fundamental properties of continuous systems. Maximum

principles form an important set of properties for diﬀusion-type equations as these maximum princi-

ples have mathematical implications and physical consequences. In the study on partial diﬀerential

equations, maximum principles are often used in existence theorems, and in obtaining point-wise

estimates. For further details on (continuous) maximum principles refer to [40, 15, 18, 17, 47, 20].

A direct consequence of maximum principles for diﬀusion-type is the non-negativity of the so-

lution (under appropriate conditions on the source and boundary conditions). Physical quantities

like concentration of a diﬀusant should be non-negative by their nature and their approximations

should also be non-negative as well. The question to ask is whether a chosen numerical formulation

satisﬁes these maximum principles and meet the non-negative constraint. The discrete version of

maximum principles is commonly referred as discrete maximum principles.

Many existing numerical formulations and packages do not satisfy the maximum principles. They

may produce negative values for the primary variables in diﬀusion-type equations (that is, negative

values for the concentration and temperature). It should be emphasized that the violation is not

mere numerical noise, that is, the violations will be much larger than the machine precision and

cannot be neglected.

For example, in Figure 1, we have shown that the contours of concentration obtained using

Abaqus [1] for pure diﬀusion. The uncoupled problem is similar to one considered in Section

2

4. As one can see from the ﬁgure, signiﬁcant part of the domain has negative solution. The
minimum value of the concentration is approximately −0.0832, which is 4.16% oﬀ the range of
In a subsequent section we show that the classical
possible values (which is between 0 and 2).

single-ﬁeld Galerkin formulation produces negative values for the concentration for the same test

problem (see Figure 15), and produces (qualitatively and quantitatively) wrong results for a cou-

pled deformation-diﬀusion problem. Furthermore, Nakshatrala and Valocchi [45] have shown that

the lowest order Raviart-Thomas [48] and variational multiscale [36, 44] mixed formulations violate

discrete maximum principle and produce negative solutions for pure diﬀusion equation. Nagara-

jan and Nakshatrala [42] have shown that the single-ﬁeld formulation violates discrete maximum

principles for diﬀusion with decay.

1.2. Our approach. Herein, we will consider realistic problems, allow the medium to be inhomo-

geneous, consider anisotropic diﬀusion, and develop a robust computational framework that will

always produce physically meaningful non-negative values for the concentration of the diﬀusant on

general computational grids. The computational framework will consist of a non-negative formula-

tion for diﬀusion equation, a single-ﬁeld formulation for the deformation problem, and a staggered

coupling algorithm.

We employ a staggered coupling technique (also known as partitioned solution approach) to cou-

ple individual analyses to obtain the coupled response. The non-negative formulation for diﬀusion

is developed by extending the Galerkin formulation using convex programming, which produces

(physical) non-negative solutions for the concentration even on general computational grids with

low-order ﬁnite elements (linear three-node triangular, bilinear four-node quadrilateral, linear four-

node tetrahedron, and tri-linear eight-node brick elements). The proposed non-negative formulation

being applicable only to low-order ﬁnite elements is not a limitation as low-order ﬁnite elements

remain quite popular in the solution of practical problems. (This is particularly true for large-scale

simulations with complex geometries because of the inherent simplicity of low-order elements. An-

other reason is that adaptive mesh-generation techniques are simpler and tend to perform better

with low-order ﬁnite elements.)

1.3. Main contributions of this paper. Some of the main contributions of this paper are as

follows:

(1) We presented a mathematical model for diﬀusion of an inert chemical species in an elastic

deformable solid that takes into account the eﬀect of diﬀusant on the deformation. The model

is truly coupled in the sense that the deformation of the solid will be aﬀected by the diﬀusion

process, and the diﬀusion process is in turn aﬀected by the deformation of the solid. Such a

3

coupled deformation-diﬀusion model is suitable to study degradation/healing in elastic solids.

We restricted our model to steady-state.

(2) We presented a robust computational framework for performing deformation–diﬀusion analysis.

The framework includes a solver for deformation, a non-negative solver for tensorial-diﬀusion,

and a coupling algorithm to couple the individual deformation and diﬀusion analyses. The

coupling algorithm is a staggered algorithm in which deformation and diﬀusion sub-problems are

solved in an iterative fashion until convergence. An important aspect of the proposed framework

is that it employs a novel numerical formulation that ensures non-negative solutions for the

concentration of the diﬀusant.

(3) Using the proposed computational framework, we solved some realistic ﬁnite domain problems

on general computational meshes. Also, we systematically studied the eﬀect of the concentra-

tion of the diﬀusant on the deformation of the solid and vice-versa, and their implications on

degradation/healing of materials and structures.

1.4. An outline of this paper and symbolic notation. The remainder of this paper is orga-

nized as follows. Section 2 presents a mathematical model for degradation/healing of a deformable

elastic solid. The mathematical model will require performing coupled deformation-diﬀusion analy-

sis. In Section 3 we present a fully coupled computational framework for deformation-diﬀusion anal-

ysis. The proposed computational framework will contain a non-negative formulation for tensorial-

diﬀusion equation on general computational grids (which will always produce physically meaningful

non–negative values for the concentration), a numerical solver for deformation, and a staggered cou-

pling algorithm for coupling individual diﬀusion and deformation numerical solvers. In Section 4,

representative numerical examples will be presented to illustrate the performance of the proposed

coupled deformation-diﬀusion computational framework. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

The symbolic notation adopted in this paper is as follows. We shall make a distinction between

vectors in the continuum and ﬁnite element settings. Similarly, we make a distinction between

second-order tensors in the continuum setting versus matrices in the context of the ﬁnite element

method. The continuum vectors are denoted by lower case boldface normal letters, and the second-

order tensors will be denoted using upper case boldface normal letters (for example, vector u and

second-order tensor T).

In the ﬁnite element context, we shall denote the vectors using lower

case boldface italic letters, and the matrices are denoted using upper case boldface italic letters

(for example, vector v and matrix K). Other notational conventions adopted in this paper are

introduced as needed.

4

2. A MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR COUPLED DEFORMATION-DIFFUSION

Consider an inert (chemical or biological) species being diﬀused through a deformable elastic
solid. We now present a simple mathematical model for such a process. Let Ω ⊂ Rnd be a bounded
open domain, where “nd” denotes the number of spatial dimensions. The boundary ∂Ω is assumed
to be piecewise smooth. Mathematically, ∂Ω = ¯Ω − Ω, where ¯Ω is the set closure of Ω. A spatial
point in ¯Ω is denoted by x. The gradient and divergence operators with respect to x are denoted by
grad[·] and div[·], respectively. The unit outward normal to the boundary is denoted by n(x). We
shall denote the displacement of the solid by u(x), and the concentration of the diﬀusant by c(x).

It is important to note that the concentration is a non-negative quantity, and a robust numerical

solver should meet the non-negative constraint (which is not the case with many popular numerical

schemes).

For the deformation problem, the boundary is divided into two complementary parts: ΓD

which the displacement vector is prescribed, and ΓN
the diﬀusion problem, the boundary is divided into ΓD
c on which the ﬂux is prescribed. For well-posedness, we require that ΓD
ΓN
c = ∂Ω. In addition, we assume that meas(ΓD
c ∩ ΓN
ΓD
for uniqueness of the solution.

c = ∅, and ΓD

c ∪ ΓN

u on
u on which the traction vector is prescribed. For
c on which concentration is prescribed, and
u = ∂Ω,
c ) > 0

u ∪ ΓN
u ∩ ΓN
u ) > 0 and meas(ΓD

u = ∅, ΓD

2.1. A model for diﬀusion-dependent deformation. The solid is modeled using linearized

elasticity but the material parameters are allowed to depend on the concentration. The linearized

strain is deﬁned through

El :=

1

For a given concentration c(x), the stress-strain relationship will be modeled as follows:

2(cid:0)grad[u] + grad[u]T(cid:1)

Tc(u, x) = λ(x, c)tr[El]I + 2µ(x, c)El

(1)

(2)

where Tc is the Cauchy stress, and λ and µ are the Lam´e parameters but now can depend both on

the concentration and position. A simple model for the Lam´e parameters to account for degrada-

tion/healing of the material due to the presence of a diﬀusant can be taken as follows:

λ(x, c) = λ0(x) + λ1(x)

µ(x, c) = µ0(x) + µ1(x)

c(x)
cref
c(x)
cref

(3a)

(3b)

where cref

is the reference concentration (which depends on the problem); λ0 and µ0 are the

Lam´e parameters for the virgin material (that is, in the absence of the diﬀusant); and λ1(x)

and µ1(x) are the weights to account for the eﬀect of concentration on the Lam´e parameters.

5

The material parameters λ1 and µ1 can be individually positive (which means that the material

is healing), negative (which means that the material is degrading), or zero (which means that

the material is unaﬀected by the presence of the diﬀusant). However,

it is assumed that the

parameters (λ0(x), λ1(x), µ0(x) and µ1(x)) and concentration are such that we have bulk modulus
λ(x, c) + 2

3 µ(x, c) > 0 and shear modulus µ(x, c) > 0.

The above model given by equation (3) is similar to the concept of macroscopic damage variables,

which has been introduced by Kachanov [24] to model material damage. The basic idea behind

the concept of macroscopic damage variables is to quantify damage using internal variable(s). This

concept has now been widely employed in numerous other works on damage (for example, see the

review articles by Chaboche [8, 9]). In the above model, the concentration of the diﬀusant can

be thought as a macroscopic damage/healing variable. The most common criticism about using

internal variables is that these variables (in many cases) cannot be measured using physical experi-

ments. However, in the above model, the dependence of the Lam´e parameters on the concentration

can be measured indirectly by non-destructive testing methods.

It should be noted that Weitsman [56], Kringos et al.

[29, 28], and Muliana et al.

[41] have

considered material degradation as a function of concentration of the diﬀusant. However, the

models developed in these works are not fully coupled. That is, the material properties of the solid

are dependent on the concentration but the diﬀusivity is unaﬀected by the deformation of the solid.

In Reference [25], a fully coupled model is proposed but a speciﬁc boundary value problem (torsion

of a cylindrical annulus undergoing degradation) is solved using the semi-inverse method. They did

not present a computational framework, and also their mathematical model is diﬀerent from the

one present in this paper (see Remark 2.1).

2.2. A model for deformation-dependent diﬀusion. We deﬁne the ﬁrst and second invariants

of the tensor El as follows:

IEl := tr[El]

(4a)

(4b)

IIEl :=p2 dev[El] • dev[El] =r 2

3(cid:0)3 tr[E2

l ] − (tr[El])2(cid:1)

where dev[El] := El − 1
3 tr[El]I is the deviatoric part of El. (Note that the second invariant is not
the principal invariant, and the reason for such a choice will be discussed later.) For a given strain

ﬁeld (that is, for a given deformation ﬁeld), we model the eﬀect of deformation on the diﬀusivity

as follows:

DEl(x) = D0(x) + (DT (x) − D0(x))(cid:18) exp[ηT IEl] − 1

exp[ηT Eref ] − 1(cid:19) + (DS(x) − D0(x))(cid:18) exp[ηSIIEl] − 1
exp[ηSEref ] − 1(cid:19)

(5)

6

where ηT and ηS are non-negative parameters; D0(x), DT (x) and DS(x) are (respectively) the

reference diﬀusivity tensors under no, tensile, and shear strains; and Eref is a reference measure

of the strain. The above model is partly motivated by the stress-induced diﬀusion experiments on

glass done by McAfee [38, 39]. These experiments have clearly shown the following aspects, which

have been qualitatively incorporated in the above model.

(a) The relative diﬀusion rate under tension is nearly ﬁve times more than that of the relative

diﬀusion rates under compression and shear.

(b) The relative diﬀusion rate varies exponentially with respect to the (circumferential) strain for

Pyrex glass (see [38, Equation 15 and Figure 3]).

(c) The relative diﬀusion rate under compression is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of shear (see

[39, Figure 4]).

Remark 2.1. In Reference [25], the eﬀect of deformation on the diﬀusivity tensor is modeled using

the Frobenius norm of the Almansi-Hamel strain.

(In linearized elasticity, the Almansi-Hamel

strain is approximately equal to linearized strain.) Although the Frobenius norm of the strain is an

invariant, the model cannot capture the diﬀerence in diﬀusivity under tension, compression, and

shear, which has been observed in many materials. On the other hand, our model given by equation

(5) can capture such departures between the diﬀusivities under tension, compression and shear.

Remark 2.2. A remark on the choice of invariants in the model (given by equation (5)) is in

order. Note that the second principal invariant of a tensor A is deﬁned as

II ∗

A :=

1

2(cid:16)(tr[A])2 − tr[A2](cid:17)

(6)

which is diﬀerent from the one used in equation (4). It has been discussed in the literature that

the principal invariants are not suitable to ﬁt experimental data (e.g., Lurie [33], Anand [2, 3],

Criscione et al.

[13], Pleˇsek and Kruisov´a [49]). These works employed invariants of Eulerian

Hencky strain. Let the Eulerian Hencky strain be denoted by EH = ln[V], with V being the left

stretch tensor in the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient F. The ﬁrst three invariants

based on the Eulerian Hencky strain which represent dilation (k1), magnitude of distortion (k2) and

mode of distortion (k3) are given by

k1 = tr[EH] = ln[J]

k2 =pdev[EH] • dev[EH]
k3 = 3√6 det(cid:20) 1
dev[EH](cid:21)

k2

7

(7a)

(7b)

(7c)

where dev[EH ] := EH − 1
we have

3 tr[EH]I and J = det[F] > 0. For small gradients of the displacement,

EH ≈ El

(8)

In linearized elasticity, the constitutive equation depends only on k1 and k2 as any dependence

on k3 makes the model inherently non-linear (see Criscione et al.

[13]). Herein, for modeling

deformation-dependent diﬀusivity tensor we did not use k3 just to be consistent with the theory of

linearized elasticity. However, in the case of ﬁnite elasticity, one should also use the third invariant

in modeling the deformation-dependent diﬀusivity.

One of the attractive features of the above model is that the parameters in the model can be

established using standard experiments, which we shall describe below.

(a) It is easy to check that if there is no strain (that is, El = 0), then DEl = D0. Hence, one
can ﬁnd the reference diﬀusivity tensor D0 by doing a diﬀusion experiment on an unstrained

specimen.

(b) Under simple shear, we have IEl = 0, and IIEl = αS, where αS is the angle of shear. As
αS → Eref , the diﬀusivity tensor D → DS. Hence, one can ﬁnd DS and ηS by doing a diﬀusion
experiment on a specimen undergoing a simple shear.

(c) Under a uniform tri-axial tension test, the linearized strain can be written as El = αT I with
αT > 0. In this case, IIEl = 0, IEl = 3αT , and as αT → 1
3 Eref we have D → DT . Hence, one
can ﬁnd DT and ηT in the model given by equation (5) by doing a diﬀusion experiment on a

specimen under uniform tri-axial strain.

There are experimental techniques discussed in the literature for maintaining a specimen

under uniform tri-axial strain. To name a few, tri-axial tensile testing of brittle materials

such as calestone (a dental plaster), copper and aluminum alloys, austenitic stainless steel were

described by Cridland and Wood [12], Hayhurst and Felce [21] and Calloch and Marquis [7].

Advanced tri-axial testing of geomaterials such as rock and soil were carried out by Donaghe

et al. [14], Hunsche [23] and Wawersik [54]. Despite these experimental techniques, it can well

be argued that maintaining a specimen under uniform tri-axial strain can be a diﬃcult and

expensive. In that case, after determining D0, DS and ηS one can evaluate DT and ηT using

either uni-axial or bi-axial tension tests. However, in uni-axial and bi-axial tests, it should be

noted that IIEl will not be equal to zero.

Remark 2.3. For brittle materials such as concrete, ceramics, metallic alloys and geomaterials

such as soil and rock it is relatively easier to perform compression tests than tension tests. In those

8

cases, the expression for diﬀusivity tensor DEl(x) can be modeled as follows:

DEl(x) = D0(x) + (D0(x) − DC(x))(cid:18) exp[ηC IEl] − 1

exp[ηCEref ] − 1(cid:19) + (DS(x) − D0(x))(cid:18) exp[ηSIIEl] − 1
exp[ηSEref ] − 1(cid:19)

(9)

where ηC and ηS are non-negative parameters; D0(x), DC(x), and DS(x) are (respectively) ref-

erence diﬀusivity tensors under no, compressive, and shear strains. Also, it should be noted that

modeling diﬀusivity as an exponential function of stress/strain is quite popular in literature (e.g.,

see McAfee [38], Fahmy and Hurt [16]).

The diﬀusivity tensor is assumed to be symmetric, bounded, and uniformly elliptic. That is,

DEl(x) = DT

El(x) ∀ x ∈ Ω

and there exists two constants 0 < ξ1 ≤ ξ2 < +∞ such that

ξ1yT y ≤ yT DEl(x)y ≤ ξ2yT y ∀ x ∈ Ω and ∀ y ∈ Rnd

(10)

(11)

2.3. Governing ﬁeld equations. The governing equations for the deformation of the solid can

be written as follows:

div[Tc] + ρ(x)b(x) = 0 in Ω

u(x) = up(x) on ΓD
u

Tc n(x) = tp(x)

on ΓN
u

(12a)

(12b)

(12c)

where ρ(x) is the density, b(x) is the speciﬁc body force, up(x) is the prescribed displacement,
tp(x) is the prescribed traction, and recall that n(x) is the unit outward normal to the boundary.

In the absence of internal couples, the balance of angular momentum reads

Tc = TT
c

(13)

which the Cauchy stress given in equation (2) clearly satisﬁes. The governing equations for the

steady-state (deformation-dependent) diﬀusion process can be written as follows:

−div [DEl(x) grad[c]] = f (x)
c(x) = cp(x)
n(x) · DEl(x) grad[c] = hp(x) on ΓN

on ΓD
c

in Ω

c

(14a)

(14b)

(14c)

where cp(x) is the prescribed concentration, hp(x) is the prescribed concentration ﬂux on the

boundary, and f (x) is the volumetric source.

It is easy to see that the governing equations for the deformation (12) and the governing equations

for the diﬀusion (14) are coupled through equations (2) and (5). To predict the degradation/healing

9

of the solid due to the diﬀusant, one needs to solve this system of coupled nonlinear partial dif-

ferential equations given by equations (1)-(4), (5), (12) and (14). It is noteworthy that, except for

simple problems, it is not possible to ﬁnd analytical solutions to this system of equations, and one

needs to resort to numerical solutions for solving realistic and practical problems.

However, to obtain reliable and predictive numerical solutions, one has to overcome many nu-

merical challenges.

In particular, one has to make sure that the chosen numerical scheme gives

non-negative values for the concentration as a negative value for the concentration is unphysical.

We will show in a subsequent section that the classical single-ﬁeld formulation produces negative

concentrations. This is particularly true if the medium is anisotropic, and one may even get nega-

tive values for the concentration even when the medium is isotropic if the mesh is not chosen with

care. For example, one need to choose a mesh with square elements or a well-centered triangular

mesh [45] even for isotropic diﬀusion. (In two-dimensions a well-centered triangular mesh means

that all the angles of any triangle are acute. Similarly, one can deﬁne a well-centered mesh in higher

dimensions [53].)

We now present a numerical framework to solve the coupled deformation-diﬀusion equations (1)

–(14) in a systematic manner.

3. A COUPLED COMPUTATIONAL FRAMEWORK

The computational framework will be based on the Finite Element Method (FEM), convex

quadratic programming, and staggered coupling techniques. To this end, let the domain Ω be

decomposed into “N ele” non-overlapping open sub-domains (which in the ﬁnite element context

will be elements). That is,

¯Ω =

¯Ωe

N ele

[e=1

(15)

where a superposed bar denotes the set closure. The boundary of Ωe is denoted as ∂Ωe := ¯Ωe − Ωe.
For convenience and to avoid errors due to projection operators, we shall employ the same com-

putational mesh for both deformation and diﬀusion analyses.

(Note that one needs to employ

projection operators if diﬀerent computational meshes are employed for multi-ﬁeld problems like

coupled deformation-diﬀusion.) We now present individual solvers for deformation and diﬀusion,

and a coupling algorithm to couple individual solvers to obtain the coupled response. The solver

for the diﬀusion problem will always give physically meaningful non-negative values for the con-

centration.

10

3.1. A numerical solver for deformation analysis. For solving the pure deformation problem

(that is, for a given concentration ﬁeld) the computational framework utilizes the standard single-

ﬁeld (pure displacement) formulation. However, it should be noted that one can employ any other

formulation (e.g., B-bar method [22], stabilized mixed formulation [43], mixed assumed strain

formulation [50], mixed enhanced formulation [52]) to solve the (pure) deformation problem. For

completeness, we shall now brieﬂy outline the single-ﬁeld formulation. To this end, we shall deﬁne

the following function spaces:

uo
U :=nu(x) ∈(cid:0)H 1(Ω)(cid:1)nd (cid:12)(cid:12) u(x) = up(x) on ΓD
uo
W :=nw(x) ∈(cid:0)H 1(Ω)(cid:1)nd (cid:12)(cid:12) w(x) = 0 on ΓD

(16a)

(16b)

where H 1(Ω) is a standard Sobolev space on Ω [6], and recall that “nd” is the number of spatial

dimensions. The standard single-ﬁeld formulation for the pure deformation problem (12) reads:
Find u(x) ∈ U such that we have

where the bilinear form and linear functional are, respectively, deﬁned as follows:

Bu(w; u) = Lu(w) ∀ w(x) ∈ W

Bu(w; u) :=ZΩ
Lu(w) :=ZΩ

grad[w] • Tc(u, x) dΩ
w(x) · ρ(x)b(x) dΩ +ZΓN

u

w(x) · tp(x) dΓ

(17)

(18a)

(18b)

For a non-negative integer m, let Pm(Ωe) denotes the linear vector space spanned by polynomials
up-to mth order deﬁned on the sub-domain Ωe. We shall deﬁne the following ﬁnite dimensional
subsets of U and W:

U h :=(cid:26)uh(x) ∈ U (cid:12)(cid:12) uh(x) ∈(cid:0)C 0( ¯Ω)(cid:1)nd
W h :=(cid:26)wh(x) ∈ W (cid:12)(cid:12) wh(x) ∈(cid:0)C 0( ¯Ω)(cid:1)nd

, uh(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ωe ∈(cid:16)Pk(Ωe)(cid:17)nd
, wh(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ωe ∈(cid:16)Pk(Ωe)(cid:17)nd

, e = 1,··· , N ele(cid:27)
, e = 1,··· , N ele(cid:27) (19b)

(19a)

where k is a non-negative integer. A corresponding ﬁnite element formulation for the deformation
analysis can be written as: Find uh(x) ∈ U h such that we have

After the ﬁnite element discretization, the deformation analysis will involve solving the following

Bu(wh; uh) = Lu(wh) ∀ wh(x) ∈ W h

(20)

discrete equations:

Ku(c)u = f u

(21)

where u denotes the nodal displacements, c denotes the nodal concentrations, and the stiﬀness

matrix for the deformation analysis K u depends on the concentration of the diﬀusant.

11

3.2. A numerical solver for diﬀusion analysis. Before we provide a numerical solver for dif-
fusion, we shall provide a mathematical argument to show that c(x) ≥ 0 in Ω even for the coupled
problem. We shall assume that a solution exists for the coupled problem. (Proving existence of a

solution for the coupled system is a research topic by itself, and is beyond the scope of this paper.

However, in this paper we do ﬁnd a numerical solution for various coupled deformation-diﬀusion

problems.) That is, there exists a pair, u(x) and c(x), such that they satisfy the coupled system

of equations. For the given displacement ﬁeld, u(x), (and hence for a given strain ﬁeld El(x)) we

deﬁne

D(x) := DEl(x)

(22)

From the theory of partial diﬀerential equations we have the following maximum principle [15]:

Theorem 3.1. Let cp(x) ≥ 0 on ∂Ω and D(x) be continuously diﬀerentiable. If c(x) ∈ C 2(Ω) ∩
C 0( ¯Ω) satisﬁes the diﬀerential inequality −div[D(x)grad[c]] = f (x) ≥ 0 in Ω, then we have the
following non-negative property:

c(x) ≥ 0

in ¯Ω

(23)

Remark 3.2. The above maximum principle theorem is due to Hopf, and a proof can be found in

any standard textbook on partial diﬀerential equations (e.g., References [40, 15, 47, 18, 20]). One

can ﬁnd in the literature maximum principles for diﬀusion-type equations under weaker regularity
than C 2(Ω)∩ C 0( ¯Ω) (for example, see References [37, 4]). But such a thorough treatment is beyond
the scope of this paper, and is not crucial to our presentation.

As discussed earlier, many existing numerical formulations (including the single-ﬁeld formulation,

which is based on the Galerkin principle) for diﬀusion-type equation do not meet the non-negative

constraint. For example, the widely used single-ﬁeld formulation (which is based on the Galerkin

principle) does not produce physically meaningful non-negative solutions. We now present a novel

methodology of enforcing the non-negative constraint on the concentration of the diﬀusant. The

methodology works well for general computational grids and for low-order ﬁnite elements.

We start with the single-ﬁeld formulation, and then modify the underlying (discrete) variational

statement to meet the non-negative constraint. We shall deﬁne the following function spaces

P :=(cid:8)c(x) ∈ H 1(Ω)(cid:12)(cid:12) c(x) = cp(x) on ΓD
c(cid:9)
Q :=(cid:8)q(x) ∈ H 1(Ω)(cid:12)(cid:12) q(x) = 0 on ΓD
c(cid:9)

12

(24a)

(24b)

where H 1(Ω) is a standard Sobolev space [6]. We also relax the regularity of the diﬀusivity tensor

for weak solutions, and assume that

ZΩ

tr[DEl(x)T DEl(x)] dΩ < +∞

(25)

where tr[·] is the standard trace operator used in tensor algebra and continuum mechanics [10].
The standard single ﬁeld formulation for tensorial diﬀusion equation (14) reads: Find c(x) ∈ P
such that we have

where the bilinear form and linear functional are, respectively, deﬁned as

Bc(q; c) = Lc(q) ∀ q(x) ∈ Q

Bc(q; c) :=ZΩ
Lc(q) :=ZΩ

grad[q] · DEl(x)grad[c] dΩ
q(x) f (x) dΩ +ZΓN

c

q(x) hp(x) dΓ

(26)

(27a)

(27b)

It is well-known that the above weak form (26) has a corresponding variational statement, which

can be written as follows:

minimize

c(x)∈P

1
2Bc(c; c) − Lc(c)

We shall deﬁne the following ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces of P and Q:

(28)

(29a)

(29b)

P h :=nch(x) ∈ P (cid:12)(cid:12) ch(x) ∈ C 0( ¯Ω), ch(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ωe ∈ Pk(Ωe), e = 1,··· , N eleo
Qh :=nqh(x) ∈ Q(cid:12)(cid:12) qh(x) ∈ C 0( ¯Ω), qh(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)Ωe ∈ Pk(Ωe), e = 1,··· , N eleo

where k is a non-negative integer. (Recall that, for a non-negative integer m, Pm(Ωe) denotes the
linear vector space spanned by polynomials up-to mth order deﬁned on the subdomain Ωe.) A
corresponding ﬁnite element formulation can be written as: Find ch(x) ∈ P h such that we have

Bc(qh; ch) = Lc(qh) ∀ qh(x) ∈ Qh

(30)

3.2.1. A non-negative solver for tensorial diﬀusion equation. We shall use the symbols (cid:22) and (cid:23)
to denote component-wise inequalities for vectors. That is, for given any two (ﬁnite dimensional)

vectors a and b

a (cid:22) b means that

ai ≤ bi ∀ i

(31)

Similarly, one can deﬁne the symbol (cid:23). We shall denote the standard inner-product on Euclidean
spaces by h·;·i.

13

After ﬁnite element discretization, for given nodal displacement vector u, the discrete equation

for the diﬀusion analysis takes the following form:

K c(u)c = f c

(32)

where Kc is a symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix, c is the vector containing nodal concentrations,

and f c is the source vector. Let “ndof s” denote the number of degrees-of-freedom for the concen-
tration. The matrix Kc is of size ndof s × ndof s, and the vectors c and f c are of size ndof s × 1.
The ﬁnite element discretized equation (32) is equivalent to the following minimization problem:

minimize
c∈Rndof s

1
2hc; K c(u)ci − hc; f ci

(33)

As shown in Figure 15(a), the numerical formulation based on equations (32) and (33) produces un-

physical negative concentrations for many practically important problems. (More examples showing

Galerkin formulation producing negative solutions can be found in Reference [42].) Following the

ideas outlined in References [45, 32, 42] a non-negative formulation corresponding to (33) can be

written as follows:

minimize
c∈Rndof s

1
2hc; K c(u)ci − hc; f ci

subject to c (cid:23) 0

(34a)

(34b)

Since for a given nodal displacement vector, the matrix K c(u) is positive deﬁnite, the above problem

(34) belongs to convex quadratic programming. From optimization theory it can be shown that

the problem (34) has a unique global minimizer. There are many robust numerical algorithms

available in the literature to solve the aforementioned constrained minimization problem (e.g.,

active set strategy, interior point methods, barrier methods). In all our numerical simulations, we

have employed the active set strategy. A detailed discussion on numerical optimization can be

found in references [46, 5, 34].

3.3. A staggered coupling algorithm. Current coupling algorithms are broadly classiﬁed into

main classes: monolithic and staggered schemes. In monolithic schemes discretization scheme is

applied to the full problem. On the other hand, in staggered schemes (which are based on operator-

split techniques) the coupled system is partitioned, often according to the diﬀerent coupled ﬁelds

(in our case, concentration and displacement in deformation-diﬀusion analysis), and each partition

is treated by diﬀerent and tailored numerical schemes. There is no easy way to incorporate our non-

negative formulation within a monolithic scheme. Therefore, we shall employ a staggered coupling

approach. The various steps of the proposed coupling algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.

14

Algorithm 1 Staggered coupling algorithm for deformation-diﬀusion analysis
1: Input: tolerance (ǫ(c)
2: Guess c(0) (cid:23) 0
3: for i = 1, 2,··· do

TOL), maximum number of iteration (MAXITERS)

if i > MAXITERS then

4:

5:

6:

7:

Solution did not converge in speciﬁed maximum number of iterations. EXIT

end if
Call deformation solver: Obtain u(i) by solving

K u(c(i−1))u(i) = f u

8:

Call non-negative diﬀusion solver: Obtain c(i) by solving the following minimization problem

minimize
c(i) ∈Rndof s

1
2hc(i); K c(u(i))c(i)i − hc(i); f ci

subject to c(i) (cid:23) 0

9:

10:

11:

if kc(i) − c(i−1)k < ǫ(c)

TOL then

Staggered scheme converged. EXIT

end if

12: end for

Remark 3.3. In this paper, we shall use the 2-norm in the stopping criterion kc(i) − c(i−1)k <
ǫ(c)
TOL in the staggered coupling algorithm. However, one could use any other norm as in (ﬁnite
dimensional) Euclidean spaces all norms are equivalent [19].

Remark 3.4. It should be noted that even though the solution procedure is a staggered scheme, the

problem is coupled, and the converged numerical solution will be the coupled response.

4. PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK

In this section, we present numerical solutions of several realistic problems using the proposed

mathematical model and computational framework. The ﬁrst set of problems involve degrada-

tion/healing of beams, and the second set involves degradation/healing of rectangular domains

with holes. All these problems naturally arise in many important engineering applications. For

example, study of degradation of beams is important to assess the performance of structural com-

ponents in bridges, towers, buildings and aircraft wings. The second set of problems is to study

the degradation of ducts carrying chemicals (e.g., water, carbon-dioxide, coolant) cutting through

15

a slab or a wall, which have many applications in civil and nuclear structures. Using these two

sets of representative problems we will illustrate the performance of the proposed computational

framework for coupled deformation-diﬀusion analyses. In particular, we will show that the proposed

computational framework produces physical and reliable solutions. We also systematically study

the eﬀect of the concentration of the diﬀusant on the deformation of the solid and vice-versa.

Here, in these representative numerical examples we have chosen D0, DT and DS as follows:

D0 =  cos(θ) − sin(θ)

cos(θ) !  d1

sin(θ)

0

DT = ΦT D0

DS = ΦSD0

0

d2 !  cos(θ)
− sin(θ)

sin(θ)

cos(θ) !

(35a)

(35b)

(35c)

where ΦT and ΦS are some positive real numbers. The reason for choosing such a form is that

a change in each of the DT and DS eﬀect the concentration in a considerable manner in various

important realistic problems. But in general each component of DT , DS may be diﬀerent from that

of D0, even then our computational framework is still valid and works as shown in the representative

problems outline in subsections plate with a hole 4.5.1 and beam with three holes 4.5.2, where in

DT and DS are chosen as follows:

sin(θ)

DT =  cos(θ) − sin(θ)
DS =  cos(θ) − sin(θ)

cos(θ) !  dT
cos(θ) !  dS

sin(θ)

1
0

1
0

0
dT

2 !  cos(θ)
− sin(θ)
2 !  cos(θ)
− sin(θ)

0
dS

sin(θ)

cos(θ) !
cos(θ) !

sin(θ)

(36a)

(36b)

4.1. Numerical h-convergence study. In this subsection, we perform a numerical h-convergence

study by employing the proposed computational framework on a coupled deformation-diﬀusion

problem. Herein, by h-convergence we mean the overall convergence of the proposed framework

with respect to the reﬁnement of the computational mesh (but still maintaining the same order of

interpolation within each ﬁnite element). Since the non-negative solver for diﬀusion works only for

low-order ﬁnite element, we employ low-order ﬁnite elements in all our numerical simulations. It

should be noted that for each successful coupled analysis using the proposed computational frame-

work, the staggered coupling algorithm should converge. For each iteration in the staggered coupling

algorithm, the active-set strategy in the non-negative solver for the diﬀusion problem should con-

verge.

We employ the method of manufactured solutions [27] in this convergence study. The computa-
tional domain is taken as a bi-unit square (0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 1). The displacement vector is

16

given by

u(x, y) =

v(x, y) =

1
π
1
π

sin(

) sin(

cos(

) cos(

πx
2
πx
2

)

πy
2
πy
2

)

The concentration is given by

c(x, y) = 1 +

1
π

sin(

πx
2

) sin(

πy
2

)

(37a)

(37b)

(38)

Note that the concentration given in the above equation is non-negative in the whole computational

domain. The following parameters are assumed in the convergence study:

µ0 = π + 2, µ1 = −π, λ0 = 2, λ1 = −1, ρ = 1, Eref = 0.0001,
cref = 1, ηT = 1, ηS = 1, βT = 2, βS = 2, γS =

βS − 1

exp[ηSEref ] − 1

,

D0 = 2 I, DT = βT D0, DS = βSD0

The volumetric source for the diﬀusion problem is given by

f (x, y) = π sin(

πx
2

) sin(

πy
2

)(cid:16)(1 − γS) + γS exphcos(
)i

sin(πx) cos(πy)exphcos(

πx
2

πy
2

) sin(

πγS
4

−

The speciﬁc body force for the deformation problem is given by

πx
2

) sin(

πy
2

)i(cid:17)

b(x, y) =  π sin( πx

π cos( πx

2 ) sin( πy

2 ) + π

2 ) cos( πy

2 ) − π

4 cos(πx)(1 − cos(πy))

4 sin(πx) sin(πy)

!

(39)

(40)

(41)

The boundary value problem is pictorially described in Figure 2. The tolerance in the stopping
criterion for the staggered coupling algorithm is taken as ǫ(c)
TOL = 10−8. A hierarchy of meshes
similar to the ones shown in Figure 3 is employed in the numerical convergence study. In Figure

4, the obtained numerical solution using the mesh shown in Figure 3(a) is compared with the

analytical solution. The convergence of the proposed coupled framework is illustrated in Figures 5
and 6 for three-node triangular and four-node quadrilateral elements with respect to L2-norm and
H 1-seminorm, and the proposed computational framework performed well.

In the subsequent subsections, we employ the proposed computational framework to solve various

ﬁnite domain practical problems. Using these we illustrate how the tension, compression and shear

in the solid aﬀect the (steady-state) diﬀusion process, and how the concentration of the diﬀusant

aﬀect the deformation of the solid. The values of the parameters that are common to all the test

problems are presented in Table 1. We have given the values for the volumetric source and body

force for all the test problems in Table 2.

17

Table 1. Values of the parameters that are the same in all test problems (except for the

one in the numerical h-convergence).

Parameter

value

ρ

cref

Eref

λ0

µ0

λ1

µ1

1

1

0.0001
+106
+106
−9 × 105
−9 × 105

Table 2. Volumetric source f (x) and body force b(x) for various test problems.

Test problem

f (x)

b(x)

Cantilever beam with edge shear

Simply supported beam under self-weight

Fixed beam under self-weight

Plate with a hole under self-weight

Beam with three holes under self-weight

0

10000
1000 −10 ˆey
100 −10 ˆey
−10 ˆey
0
−10 ˆey

0

4.2. Cantilever beam with edge shear. The purpose of this test problem is to illustrate the

aﬀect of DS on the coupled response. We consider a cantilever beam with a uniform edge shear

of 500. The length of the beam is 1.0, and the height of the beam is 0.1. For the deformation

problem, top and bottom surfaces are subjected to zero traction. For the diﬀusion problem, zero

concentration is prescribed on the top and bottom surfaces, and zero ﬂux is prescribed on the left

and right surfaces. The boundary value problem is pictorially described in Figure 7.

We have employed a structured mesh using four-node quadrilateral elements with 21 nodes

along each side of the domain (see the mesh in Figure 8). The stopping criterion is again taken
as ǫ(c)
TOL = 10−8. We have considered three diﬀerent values for ΦS: 5, 10, and 20. The other
parameters used in the coupled analysis are as follows:

θ =

π
6

, d1 = 1, d2 = 1, ΦT = 2, ηT = 100, ηS = 1

(42)

The contour proﬁles for the concentration for these three values are shown in Figure 8. As expected,

the diﬀusant accumulated near the right side of the domain (where the uniform edge shear is

applied). In Table 3, we have presented the maximum concentration and the number of iterations

taken by the staggered coupling algorithm for the chosen values of ΦS. One can observe that as

18

Table 3. Cantilever beam with edge shear: The table presents the maximum concentration

and the number of iterations taken by the staggered coupling algorithm for various values

of ΦS. (Note that the minimum concentration in all the cases is zero.)

ΦS Max. concentration Iterations

5

10

20

4.257 × 10−1
2.187 × 10−1
1.107 × 10−1

14

9

7

Table 4. Simply supported beam under self-weight: The table presents the maximum

concentration and the iterations taken by the staggered coupling algorithm for various values

of ηS. (Note that the minimum concentration in all the cases is zero.)

ηS

Max. concentration Iterations

1
103
2 × 104

7.205 × 10−1
7.309 × 10−1
9.365 × 10−1

10

10

12

ΦS increases, the staggered coupling algorithm takes fewer iterations. This can be explained as ΦS

increases, the diﬀusivity increases and the diﬀusant is more uniformly distributed (which is evident

from Figure 8).

4.3. Simply supported beam under self-weight. The purpose of this test problem is to study

the aﬀect of ηS on the coupled response, and to illustrate the competitive eﬀects of shear and

tension/compression on the diﬀusion process. We consider a simply supported beam under self-

weight with traction-free surfaces. The boundary value problem is pictorially described in Figure

9.

The tolerance for the stopping criterion in the staggered coupling algorithm is taken as ǫ(c)

TOL =
10−5. We have employed a structured mesh using four-node quadrilateral element with 21 nodes

along each side of the domain (see the mesh in Figure 10). We have considered three values for ηS:
1, 103 and 2 × 104. The other parameters used in this test problem are as follows:

θ =

π
6

, d1 = 1, d2 = 1, ΦT = 10, ΦS = 10, ηT = 1

(43)

From Table 4 one can infer that as ηS increases the maximum concentration and iterations taken

for convergence of staggered coupling algorithm increase. This is because for lower values of ηS

shear aﬀects the diﬀusivity tensor more than the tension/compression and for higher values of ηS

tension/compression dominates. This is also evident in the numerical results presented in Figure

19

Table 5. Fixed beam under self-weight: The table presents the maximum concentration

and the iterations taken by the staggered coupling algorithm for various values of ηT . (Note

that the minimum concentration in all the cases is zero.)

ΦT Max. concentration Iterations

1

5

7

1.250 × 10−1
1.348 × 10−1
1.575 × 10−1

2

5

8

10. For lower values of ηS, the diﬀusant accumulated near the supports of the beam (where the

shear is maximum). For higher values of ηS, the diﬀusant spreads deep into beam. An important

feature to be noted is that the concentration proﬁle curves up. This is because the diﬀusivity is

higher in tension than in compression. This is physically meaningful, as, in general, the sizes of

pores in the solid enlarge due to tension, shrink due to compression, and distort due to shear.

The deformation-dependent diﬀusivity tensor DEl(x) given by equation (5) takes these factors into
account. The next test problem highlights other important features of the proposed mathematical

model.

4.4. Fixed beam under self-weight. The purpose of this test problem is to study the aﬀect of

ΦT on the coupled response and show that our model can capture the qualitative aspects of the

experiments done by McAfee [38, 39]. A ﬁxed beam of length unity and depth 0.1 is subjected

to self-weight. The top and bottom surfaces are traction-free. For the diﬀusion problem, the top

and bottom surfaces have zero concentration, and the left and right surfaces have zero ﬂux. The

boundary value problem is pictorially described in Figure 11.

The tolerance for the stopping criterion in the staggered coupling algorithm is taken as ǫ(c)

TOL =
10−7. We have employed a structured mesh using four-node quadrilateral element with 21 nodes

along each side of the domain (see the mesh in Figure 12). We have considered three diﬀerent

values for ΦT : 1, 5 and 7. The other parameters used in this test problem are as follows:

θ = 0, d1 = 1, d2 = 1, ΦS = 1, ηT = 100, ηS = 1

(44)

In Table 5, we have presented the maximum concentration and number of iterations taken by

the staggered coupling algorithm for chosen values of ΦT . One can observe that as ΦT increases the

maximum concentration and iterations taken increase. This results in the deformation-dependent

diﬀusivity DEl being high in tensile and low in compressive and shear regions of the beam. The
diﬀusant accumulates in low diﬀusive areas such as the supports which are under shear and top

section of the beam which is in compression. From Figure 12 one can observe that the concentration

proﬁle which is initially around the central line of the beam curves up (the region of interest being

20

around 0.12). This test problem shows the success of our mathematical model in predicting the

underlying physical phenomena observed from the stress-induced experiments done by McAfee

[38, 39]. The invariants which represent dilation and distortion in our model were instrumental

in capturing the change in diﬀusivity under tension, compression and shear. Hence concentration

curves towards the compression zone.

This type of curving of the concentration proﬁle is not observed when one uses the model in which
DEl(x) depends only on kElk. As mentioned in the Remark 2.1, a diﬀusivity model based on the
frobenius norm of El cannot capture the change in diﬀusivity tensor under tension, compression

and shear deformations. The diﬀusivity tensor as per Reference [25] and the parameters assumed

for the numerical study are given by:

DEl(x) = D0(x) + (D∞(x) − D0(x)) (1 − exp[−λkElk])
θ = 0, d1 = 1, d2 = 1, λ = 100, D∞ = 10 D0

(45a)

(45b)

The concentration proﬁle as illustrated in Figure 13 is always around the central line and does not

curve up for any value of D∞ and λ.

4.5. Degradation/healing of rectangular domains with holes. In the following subsections,

we highlight the importance of non-negative solutions and its impact on coupled deformation-

diﬀusion analyses of rectangular domains with holes. We compare the non-negative formulation

with the standard Galerkin formulation using two representative problems. We shall model DT
and DS by the equations (36) in which di

j is diﬀerent from dj where i = T, S and j = 1, 2. In both
numerical studies here, the tolerance for the stopping criterion in the staggered coupling algorithm
is taken as ǫ(c)
TOL = 10−5 and three-node triangular unstructured meshes were used (see Figures 14
and 18).

4.5.1. Plate with a hole under self-weight. The purpose of this test problem is to study the im-

portance of non-negative constraint in coupled-deformation-diﬀusion analyses. Herein, we perform

coupled analysis for a square plate with a square hole under self-weight. The computational domain
Ω is the region in-between a bi-unit square plate and a square hole of length 1

9 . The boundary con-
ditions for displacements at the hole and traction for the plate are equal to zero. The concentration

at the hole is maintained at 1 while that at boundary of the plate is equal to 0. The boundary

value problem is pictorially described in Figure 14. The other parameters assumed in the analysis

of the coupled problem are as follows:

θ =

π
3

, ηT = 1, ηS = 1, d1 = 10000, dT

1 = 11000, dS

1 = 11000, d2 = 1, dT

2 = 10, dS

2 = 5

(46)

From Figure 15 it is evident that the proposed non-negative formulation satisﬁes the above condition

and produces physically meaningful concentration while the standard Galerkin formulation predicts

21

Table 6. Plate with a hole under self-weight: The table presents the minimum concen-

tration, degradation index and the iterations taken by staggered coupling algorithm using

keeping other parameters in equations 46 ﬁxed.

the standard single-ﬁeld formulation. Analysis is done for various values of (cid:0)d1, dT
(cid:0)d1, dT

(% of nodes violated)

Min. concentration

Degradation Index

Iterations

1(cid:1)

1 , dS

1 , dS

1(cid:1) by

Iterations

(Galerkin)

(non-negative)

(1, 10, 10)

(10, 30, 20)

(100, 120, 110)

(1000, 1200, 1100)

(10000, 11000, 11000)

0

0

−3.301 × 10−3
−3.586 × 10−2
−4.398 × 10−2

0

0

25.15

32.76

34.07

9

8

6

5

4

9

8

21

22

8

otherwise. The comparison of the concentration and degradation proﬁles for the standard Galerkin

vs. the non-negative formulation given in Figures 15 and 16 shows that the Galerkin formulation

violates the non-negative constraint. The obtained negative values for the concentration are not

just numerical noise (see Table 6).

4.5.2. Beam with three holes under self-weight. The purpose of this test problem is to show that

as number of holes increase, the spatial extent and magnitude of violation of the non-negative con-

straint by the Galerkin formulation increase dramatically. Herein, we perform coupled deformation-

diﬀusion analysis for a beam with three square holes under self-weight. The computational domain

Ω is the region in-between a beam of length 10.0 and height 1.0 and three square holes each of

length 0.4. The boundary conditions for displacements at the holes and traction for the beam are

equal to zero. The concentration at the holes is maintained at 1 while that at boundary of the

beam is equal to 0. The boundary value problem is pictorially described in Figure 17. The other

parameters assumed in the analysis of the coupled problem are as follows:

θ =

π
4

, ηT = 1, ηS = 1, d1 = 10000, dT

1 = 20000, dS

1 = 15000, d2 = 1, dT

2 = 5, dS

2 = 2

(47)

From Figures 18 and 19 it is evident that as the number of holes increase, the regions of negative

concentration obtained from the standard Galerkin formulation also increases. Also from Tables 6

and 7 it is evident that the negative concentration obtained from numerical study on beam with

three holes is 1.35 times that of the plate with a hole.

From Tables 6 and 7, one can see that as the directional diﬀusivities d1, dT

1 increase the
minimum concentration (which is initially zero) becomes negative under the Galerkin formulation.

1 and dS

This negative value of concentration and the degradation index (which represents the % of nodes at

which concentration is negative) increases as these diﬀusivities increase. The proposed non-negative

22

Table 7. Beam with three holes under self-weight: The table presents the minimum con-

centration, degradation index and the iterations taken by staggered coupling algorithm using

keeping other parameters in equations 47 ﬁxed.

the standard single-ﬁeld formulation. Analysis is done for various values of (cid:0)d1, dT
(cid:0)d1, dT

(% of nodes violated)

Iterations

Min. concentration

Degradation Index

1 , dS

1(cid:1)

1 , dS

1(cid:1) by

Iterations

(Galerkin)

(non-negative)

(1, 10, 10)

(10, 50, 30)

(100, 200, 150)

(1000, 2000, 1500)

(10000, 20000, 15000)

0

0

−3.150 × 10−2
−5.665 × 10−2
−5.948 × 10−2

0

0

30.69

31.14

31.14

8

8

6

6

6

8

8

8

6

16

formulation does not give negative values for the concentration for any values for these how these

diﬀusivities. This is quite important because the material properties of the solid are dependent on

the concentration obtained. From Figures 16 and 19, one can observe that the standard Galerkin

method predicts that some regions are healing due to the negative values of the concentration which

is physically unrealistic. The non-negative solver employed always gives non-negative concentration

and shows that material is degrading everywhere.

4.6. Performance of the staggered scheme and the active-set strategy. The convergence

histories of the staggered coupling algorithm for the aforementioned test problems are shown in

Figure 20. Note that the convergence of the staggered coupling algorithm is monotonic for the

test problems on degradation/healing of beams. But the convergence is not monotonic for the test

problem on degradation/healing of rectangular domain with holes, which is illustrated in Figure

20(b)). Figure 21 shows the number of active-strategy iterations required for solving the constrained

optimization problem for each iteration in the staggered coupling algorithm.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Many technologically and biologically important processes are coupled deformation-diﬀusion

problems. Lately, there is a surge in research activity in studying coupled deformation-diﬀusion

problems. However, in all these research eﬀorts it has not been recognized that many popular

numerical formulations and existing computational packages predict unphysical negative solutions

for the concentration of the diﬀusant, and this is more prominent in the case of a medium which

has high directional diﬀusivities. Concentration of a chemical is a non-negative quantity, and this

property has to be preserved to obtain physically meaningful numerical solution for a coupled

deformation-diﬀusion problem.

23

We proposed a mathematical model for coupled deformation-diﬀusion analysis, which is suitable

to model degradation/healing of materials and structures. The model is fully coupled in the sense

that the deformation process is aﬀected by the diﬀusion process, and the diﬀusion process is in turn

aﬀected by the deformation of solid. One of the main contributions is that we have presented a

robust computational framework for solving coupled deformation-diﬀusion problems. The computa-

tional framework includes a non-negative formulation for (tensorial) diﬀusion equation, a numerical

solver for the deformation of the solid, and a staggered coupling algorithm. An important aspect of

the computational framework is that it always produces physically meaningful non-negative values

for the concentration of the diﬀusant on any computational grid (with low-order ﬁnite elements)

even for a medium which has high directional diﬀusivities. We have illustrated the robustness of the

computational framework on representative numerical examples. We have studied systematically

the aﬀect of the deformation on the diﬀusion process on various practically important problems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research reported herein was supported by Texas Engineering Experiment Station (TEES).

This support is gratefully acknowledged. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the

authors and do not necessarily reﬂect that of the sponsor.

References

[1] ABAQUS/CAE/Standard, Version 6.8-3. Simulia, Providence, Rhode Island, www.simulia.com, 2009.

[2] L. Anand. On Hencky’s approximate strain-energy function for moderate deformations. Journal of Applied Me-

chanics, 46:78–82, 1979.

[3] L. Anand. Moderate deformations in extension-torsion of incompressible isotropic elastic materials. Journal of

the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 34:293–304, 1986.

[4] M. Borsuk and V. Kondratiev. Elliptic Boundary Value Problems of Second Order in Piecewise Smooth Domains.

Elsevier Science, San Diego, USA, 2006.

[5] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2004.

[6] F. Brezzi and M. Fortin. Mixed and Hybrid Finite Element Methods, volume 15 of Springer series in computa-

tional mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, USA, 1991.

[7] S. Calloch and D. Marquis. Triaxial tension-compression tests for multiaxial cyclic plasticity. International

Journal of Plasticity, 15:521–549, 1999.

[8] J. L. Chaboche. Continuum damage mechanics: Part I - General Concepts. Journal of Applied Mechanics,

55:59–64, 1988.

[9] J. L. Chaboche. Continuum damage mechanics: Part II - Damage growth, crack initiation and crack growth.

Journal of Applied Mechanics, 55:65–72, 1988.

[10] P. Chadwick. Continuum Mechanics: Concise Theory and Problems. Dover Publications, Inc., Minealo, New

York, 1999.

24

[11] D. X. Cheng, D. N. Little, R. L. Lytton, and J. C. Holste. Moisture damage evaluation of asphalt mixtures by

considering both moisture diﬀusion and repeated-load conditions. Transportation Research Record: Journal of

the Transportation Research Board, (1832):42–49, 2003.

[12] L. Cridland and W. G. Wood. A hydrostatic tension test of a brittle material. International Journal of Fracture

Mechanics, 4:277–285, 1968.

[13] J. C. Criscione, J. D. Humphrey, A. S. Douglas, and W. C. Hunter. An invariant basis for natural strain which

yields orthogonal stress response terms in isotropic hyperelasticity. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of

Solids, 48:2445–2465, 2000.

[14] R. T. Donaghe, R. C. Chaney, and S. Marshall. Advanced Triaxial Testing of Soil and Rock. ASTM STP: 977,

1986.

[15] L. C. Evans. Partial Diﬀerential Equations. American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode Island, USA,

1998.

[16] A. A. Fahmy and J. C. Hurt. Stress dependence of water diﬀusion in epoxy resin. Polymer Composities, 1:77–80,

1980.

[17] L. E. Fraenkel. An Introduction to Maximum Principles and Symmetry in Elliptic Problems. Cambridge Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000.

[18] D. Gilbarg and N. S. Trudinger. Elliptic Partial Diﬀerential Equations of Second Order. Springer, New York,

USA, 2001.

[19] P. R. Halmos. Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces. Springer-Verlag, New York, USA, 1993.

[20] Q. Han and F. Lin. Elliptic Partial Diﬀerential Equations. American Mathematical Society, Providence, Rhode

Island, USA, 2000.

[21] D. R. Hayhurst and I. D. Felce. Creep rupture under tri-axial tension. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 25:645–

664, 1986.

[22] T. J. R. Hughes. Generalization of selective integration procedures to anisotropic and nonlinear media. Interna-

tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 15:1413–1418, 1980.

[23] U. Hunsche. Uniaxial and triaxial creep and failure tests on rock: Experimental technique and interpretation,

pages 1–54. Visco-Plastic Behavior of Geomaterials. Springer-Verlag, 1994.

[24] L. M. Kachanov. Introduction to Continuum Damage Mechanics. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,

Netherlands, 1986.

[25] S. Karra and K. R. Rajagopal. Degradation and healing in a generalized neo-Hookean solid due to infusion of a

ﬂuid. arXiv:1007.1038, 2010.

[26] Y. R. Kim, D. N. Little, and R. L. Lytton. Eﬀect of moisture damage on material properties and fatigue

resistance of asphalt mixtures. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,

(1891):48–54, 2004.

[27] P. Knupp and K. Salari. Veriﬁcation of Computer Codes in Computational Science and Engineering. Chapman

and Hall, Boca Raton, Florida, 2003.

[28] N. Kringos, T. Scarpas, A. Copeland, and J. Youtcheﬀ. Modelling of combined physical-mechanical moisture-

induced damage in asphaltic mixes, Part 2: moisture susceptibility parameters. International Journal of Pave-

ment Engineering, 9:129–151, 2008.

25

[29] N. Kringos, T. Scarpas, C. Kasbergen, and P. Selvadurai. Modelling of combined physical-mechanical moisture-

induced damage in asphaltic mixes, Part 1: governing processes and formulations. International Journal of

Pavement Engineering, 9:115–128, 2008.

[30] D. Kuhl, F. Bangert, and G. Meschke. Coupled chemo-mechanical deterioration of cementitious materials. Part

I: Modeling. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 41:15–40, 2004.

[31] D. Kuhl, F. Bangert, and G. Meschke. Coupled chemo-mechanical deterioration of cementitious materials Part

II: Numerical methods and simulations. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 41:41–67, 2004.

[32] R. Liska and M. Shashkov. Enforcing the discrete maximum principle for linear ﬁnite element solutions for elliptic

problems. Communications in Computational Physics, 3:852–877, 2008.

[33] A. I. Lurie. Nonlinear Theory of Elasticity. North Holland Series in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, Elsevier

Science, Netherlands, 1990.

[34] O. L. Mangasarian. Nonlinear Programming. SIAM, New York, USA, 1994.

[35] S. I. Marras, I. A. Ihtiaris, N. K. Hatzitrifon, K. Sikalidis, and E. C. Aifantis. A preliminary study of stress-

assisted ﬂuid penetration in ceramic bricks. Journal of the European Ceramic Society, 20:243–269, 2000.

[36] A. Masud and T. J. R. Hughes. A stabilized mixed ﬁnite element method for Darcy ﬂow. Computer Methods in

Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 191:4341–4370, 2002.

[37] V. G. Mazja and B. A. Plamenevskii. lp estimates of solutions of elliptic boundary value problems in domains

with edges. Transactions of the Moscow Mathematical Society, 1:49–97, 1980.

[38] K. B. McAfee. Stress-enhanced diﬀusion in glass I. Glass under tension and compression. Journal of Chemical

Physics, 28:218–226, 1958.

[39] K. B. McAfee. Stress-enhanced diﬀusion in glass II. Glass under shear. Journal of Chemical Physics, 28:226–229,

1958.

[40] R. McOwen. Partial Diﬀerential Equations: Methods and Applications. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA, 1996.

[41] A. Muliana, K. R. Rajagopal, and S. C. Subramanian. Degradation of an elastic composite cylinder due to the

diﬀusion of a ﬂuid. Journal of Composite Materials, 43:1225–1249, 2009.

[42] H. Nagarajan and K. B. Nakshatrala. Enforcing the non-negativity constraint and maximum principles for

diﬀusion with decay on general computational grids. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, In

print, DOI: 10.1002/ﬂd.2389, 2010.

[43] K. B. Nakshatrala, A. Masud, and K. D. Hjelmstad. On ﬁnite element formulations for nearly incompressible

linear elasticity. Computational Mechanics, 41:547–561, 2008.

[44] K. B. Nakshatrala, D. Z. Turner, K. D. Hjelmstad, and A. Masud. A stabilized mixed ﬁnite element formulation

for Darcy ﬂow based on a multiscale decomposition of the solution. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics

and Engineering, 195:4036–4049, 2006.

[45] K. B. Nakshatrala and A. J. Valocchi. Non-negative mixed ﬁnite element formulations for a tensorial diﬀusion

equation. Journal of Computational Physics, 228:6726–6752, 2009.

[46] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer Verlag, New York, USA, 1999.

[47] M. H. Protter and H. F. Weinberger. Maximum Principles in Diﬀerential Equations. Springer-Verlag, New York,

USA, 1999.

[48] P. A. Raviart and J. M. Thomas. A mixed ﬁnite element method for 2nd order elliptic problems. In Mathematical

Aspects of the Finite Element Method, pages 292–315, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1977.

26

[49] J. Pleˇsek and A. Kruisov´a. Formulation, validation and numerical procedures for Hencky’s elasticity model.

Computer and Structures, 84:1141–1150, 2006.

[50] J. C. Simo and M. S. Rifai. A class of mixed assumed strain methods and the method of incompatible modes.

International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 29:1595–1638, 1990.

[51] P. Sofronis. The inﬂuence of mobility of dissolved hydrogen on the elastic response of a metal. Journal of

Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 43:1385–1407, 1995.

[52] R. L. Taylor. A mixed-enhanced formulation for tetrahedral ﬁnite elements. International Journal for Numerical

Methods in Engineering, 47:205–227, 2000.

[53] E. Vanderzee, A. N. Hirani, D. Guoy, and E. Ramos. Well-centered triangulation. Technical Report UIUCDCS-

R-2008-2936, Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, February 2008.

Also available as a preprint at arXiv as arXiv:0802.2108v1 [cs.CG].

[54] W. R. Wawersik, L. W. Carlson, D. J. Holcomb, and R. J. Williams. New method for true-triaxial rock testing.

International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, 34:330.e1–330.e14, 1997.

[55] Y. Weitsman. Coupled damage and moisture-transport in ﬁber-reinforced polymeric composities. International

Journal of Solids and Structures, 23:1003–1025, 1987.

[56] Y. J. Weitsman. Anomalous ﬂuid sorption in polymeric composites and its relation to ﬂuid-induced damage.

Composities Part A: applied science and manufacturing, 37:617–623, 2006.

[57] J. Woodtli and R. Kieselbach. Damage due to hydrogen embrittlement and stress corrosion cracking. Engineering

Failure Analysis, 7:427–450, 2000.

[58] J. C. Wu and N. A. Peppas. Numerical simulation of anomalous penetrant diﬀusion in polymers. Journal of

Applied Polymer Science, 49:1845–1856, 1993.

27

2.0

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0.0

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 1. ABAQUS simulation for plate with a square hole: The left ﬁgure shows three-

node triangular mesh used in the simulation using Abaqus [1]. The right ﬁgure shows

contours of concentration obtained using Abaqus for the problem described in subsection

4.5.1. The white area in the right ﬁgure indicates the region in which concentration has a

negative value. Approximately 37 % of nodes have negative values. The minimum concen-
tration obtained is −0.0832 (which is -4.16 % oﬀ the range of possible values: 0 to 2). We
have taken d1 = 10000, d2 = 1, and θ = −π/6.

PSfrag replacements

hp(x) = 0

PSfrag replacements

u(x) = up(x)

speciﬁc body force is

given by equation (41)

1
=

)
x
(
p
c

u(x) = up(x)

volumetric source is
given by equation (40)

volumetric source is
given by equation (40)

=
0

h
p
(
x
)

)
x
(
p
u
=

)
x
(
u

speciﬁc body force is
given by equation (41)

u
(
x
)

=
u
p
(
x
)

O

cp(x) = 1

cp(x) = 1
hp(x) = 0

O

u(x) = up(x)

Figure 2. Numerical h-convergence: A pictorial description of the boundary value problem.

The computational domain is a bi-unit square with origin denoted as O. The boundary

conditions and the volumetric source for the diﬀusion problem is shown in the left ﬁgure.

The (Dirichlet) boundary conditions and the speciﬁc body force for the deformation problem
is shown in the right ﬁgure. The Dirichlet boundary conditions up(x) are prescribed by

directly evaluating the expressions for the displacement given in equation (37).

28

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 3. Numerical h-convergence: This ﬁgure shows the typical three-node triangular

and four-node quadrilateral meshes used in the numerical convergence analysis. Both these

meshes have 21 nodes along each side. For the numerical convergence analysis, these meshes

are subdivided in a hierarchical manner to obtain a series of meshes.

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

1.30

1.24

1.18

1.12

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

1.06

0.2

1.00

0

0

1.30

1.24

1.18

1.12

1.06

1.00

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 4. Numerical h-convergence: Comparison of concentration proﬁle from analytical

solution (left) to that of the numerical study (right) using three-node triangular mesh shown

in Figure 3.

29

)
r
o
r
r
e
(
g
o
l

−2

−4

−6

−8

 

−10
2

 

slope = 0.93

slope = 1.52

L2− norm
H1− seminorm

2.5

3

−log(h)

3.5

4

)
r
o
r
r
e
(
g
o
l

−2

−4

−6

−8

 

−10
2

 

L2− norm
H1− seminorm

slope = 0.99

slope = 1.64

2.5

3

−log(h)

3.5

4

Figure 5. Numerical h-convergence: Convergence of the proposed computational frame-

work with respect to the concentration ﬁeld is illustrated in this ﬁgure. We show the
convergence in L2-norm and H 1-seminorm for three-node triangular (left) and four-node

quadrilateral (right) ﬁnite elements.

0

−4

−8

)
r
o
r
r
e
(
g
o
l

 

−12
2

 

−2

−4

−6

−8

)
r
o
r
r
e
(
g
o
l

 

L2− norm
H1− seminorm

slope = 1.00

slope = 1.99

slope = 0.99

slope = 1.99

L2− norm
H1− seminorm
3

2.5

−log(h)

3.5

4

 

−10
2

2.5

3

−log(h)

3.5

4

Figure 6. Numerical h-convergence: Convergence of the proposed computational frame-

work with respect to the displacement ﬁeld is illustrated in this ﬁgure. We show the
convergence in L2-norm and H 1-seminorm for three-node triangular (left) and four-node

quadrilateral (right) ﬁnite elements.

30

PSfrag replacements

1
.
0

O

0
=

)
x
(
p
h

O

1.0

b(x) = 0

uniformly distributed shear = 500

cp(x) = 0

f (x) = 104

cp(x) = 0

h
p
(
x
)

=
0

Figure 7. Cantilever beam with edge shear: A pictorial description of the boundary value

problem with origin at ‘O’. The boundary conditions and the speciﬁc body force for the

deformation problem is shown in the top ﬁgure and the boundary conditions and the volu-

metric source for the diﬀusion problem is shown in the bottom ﬁgure.

31

Figure 8. Cantilever beam with edge shear: Four-node quadrilateral mesh (top ﬁgure)

PSfrag replacements

used in the numerical study and comparison of the concentration proﬁles (in the order of

precedence) for three diﬀerent values of ΦS being equal to 5, 10 and 20

.

1.0

b(x) = −10 ˆey

cp(x) = 0

f (x) = 103

cp(x) = 0

h
p
(
x
)

=
0

1
.
0

O

0
=

)
x
(
p
h

O

Figure 9. Simply supported beam under self-weight: A pictorial description of the bound-

ary value problem with origin at ‘O’. The boundary conditions and the speciﬁc body force

for the deformation problem is shown in the top ﬁgure and the boundary conditions and the

volumetric source for the diﬀusion problem is shown in the bottom ﬁgure.

32

Figure 10. Simply supported beam under self-weight: Four-node quadrilateral mesh (top

PSfrag replacements

ﬁgure) used in the numerical study and comparison of the concentration proﬁles (in the
order of precedence) for three diﬀerent values of ηS being equal to 1, 103 and 2 × 104

.

1.0

b(x) = −10 ˆey

cp(x) = 0

f (x) = 102

cp(x) = 0

h
p
(
x
)

=
0

1
.
0

O

O

0
=

)
x
(
p
h

Figure 11. Fixed beam under self-weight: A pictorial description of the boundary value

problem with origin at ‘O’. The boundary conditions and the speciﬁc body force for the

deformation problem is shown in the top ﬁgure and the boundary conditions and the volu-

metric source for the diﬀusion problem is shown in the bottom ﬁgure.

33

Figure 12. Fixed beam under self-weight: Four-node quadrilateral mesh (top ﬁgure) used

in the numerical study and comparison of the concentration proﬁles (in the order of prece-

dence) for three diﬀerent values of ΦT being equal to 1, 5 and 7.

Figure 13. Fixed beam under self-weight: The concentration proﬁles obtained using the

diﬀusivity model (45) as outlined in Reference [25].

34

PSfrag replacements

1.0

1/9

PSfrag replacements

1

0
.
1

0.8

0
.
1

9
/
1

H

cp(x) = 1

O

cp(x) = 0

1.0
9
/
1

1/9

O

H
cp(x) = 1
cp(x) = 0

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 14. Plate with a hole under self-weight: A pictorial description of the dimensions

for a plate with a hole in the left ﬁgure and three-node triangular unstructured mesh used in

our numerical study in right ﬁgure. The origin is located at ‘O’ and the vertex ‘H’ of the hole

9 , 4

at (cid:0) 4
9(cid:1). Displacements at the boundary of the hole and traction at the boundary of the
plate are zero. In the region between the plate and the hole, the body force is b(x) = −10 ˆey
and the volumetric source is f (x) = 0. The concentration at the boundary of the hole is 1

and at the boundary of the plate is 0.

35

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.20

0.2

0.00

0

0

1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 15. Plate with a hole under self-weight: This ﬁgure compares concentration proﬁles

from the standard Galerkin formulation (left ﬁgure) and the non-negative formulation (right

ﬁgure). The white area in the left ﬁgure indicates the regions in which concentration is

negative. The violations also include that are of order machine precision.

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

Y

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
X

0.8

1

Figure 16. Plate with a hole under self-weight: This ﬁgure compares degradation proﬁles

from the standard Galerkin formulation (left ﬁgure) and the non-negative formulation (right

ﬁgure). The red area indicates the regions in which the material is degrading and the green

area indicates the regions in which the material is healing (which is because unphysical

negative value for the concentration). In this ﬁgure we do not consider negative values of

order machine precision as violations.

36

10.0

B

H2

C

H3

0
.
1

O

A

H1

Figure 17. Beam with three holes under self-weight: A pictorial description of the dimen-
sions for a beam with three square holes. The dimensions of each hole are 0.4 × 0.4. The
origin is located at ‘O’ and the vertices ‘H1’, ‘H2’ and ‘H3’ of the holes ‘A, B, C’ are at

(1.8, 0.3), (4.8, 0.3) and (7.8, 0.3). Displacements at the boundary of the holes and traction

at the boundary of the beam are zero. In the region between the beam and the holes, the
body force is b(x) = −10 ˆey and the volumetric source is f (x) = 0. The concentration at
the boundary of the holes is 1 and at the boundary of the beam is 0.

Figure 18. Beam with three holes under self-weight: Comparison of concentration proﬁle

from standard Galerkin formulation (middle ﬁgure) to that of the non-negative formulation

(bottom ﬁgure). Three-node triangular unstructured mesh used in the numerical study is

shown in the top ﬁgure. The white area in the middle ﬁgure indicates the region in which

concentration has a negative value. In this ﬁgure, the white area also includes the regions

with concentration of order machine precision.

37

Figure 19. Beam with three holes under self-weight: Comparison of degradation proﬁle

from standard Galerkin formulation (top ﬁgure) to that of the non-negative formulation

(bottom ﬁgure). The red area indicates material is degrading and the green area indicates

the material is healing (because of unphysical negative value for the concentration).

In

this ﬁgure we do not consider the negative values that are of order machine precision as

violations.

38

 

Cantilever
Simply supp.
Fixed 

5

0

−5

−10

¤
k
)
1
−

i
(
c
−

)
i
(
c
k
£

n

l

−15

 

−20
0

2

4

6

Iterations

8

10

12

¤
k
)
1
−

i
(
c
−

)
i
(
c
k
£

n
l

5

0

−5

−10

 

−15
0

Plate with a hole
Beam with three holes

 

5

10

Iterations

15

20

Figure 20. Convergence of staggered coupling algorithm: We have plotted ln[kc(i) −
c(i−1)k] with respect to iteration number for various problems. The stopping criterion in
the staggered coupling algorithm is kc(i) − c(i−1)k < ǫ(c)
TOL. As one can see from the ﬁgure,
the staggered coupling algorithm converges for all the chosen problems. Also, note that the

algorithm need not converge monotonically, which is evident in the case of plate with a hole

test problem.

Maruti Kumar Mudunuru, Graduate Student, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M

University, College Station, Texas 77843.

E-mail address: maruti.iitm@neo.tamu.edu

Correspondence to: Dr. Kalyana Babu Nakshatrala, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 216

Engineering/Physics Building, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843. TEL:+1-979-

845-1292

E-mail address: knakshatrala@tamu.edu

39

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
t
i
 
t
e
s
−
e
v
i
t
c
A

10

9

8

7

 

22

20

18

16

14

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
t
i
 
t
e
s
−
e
v
i
t
c
A

 

12
0

 

Cantilever
Fixed
Simply supp.

9

10 11 12

1

2

3

5

4
8
Staggered iterations

6

7

 

Plate with a hole
Beam with three holes

5

10

Staggered iterations

15

20

Figure 21. Convergence of the active-set strategy: This ﬁgure shows the number of itera-

tions taken by the active-set strategy for each iteration in the staggered coupling algorithm

for various test problems.

40

