An Introduction to Hedge Funds

Sovan Mitra

9
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
7
1

 

 
 
]

.

N
G
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

2
v
1
3
7
2

.

4
0
9
0
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

This report was originally written as an industry white paper on Hedge Funds. This

paper gives an overview to Hedge Funds, with a focus on risk management issues. We

deﬁne and explain the general characteristics of Hedge Funds, their main investment

strategies and the risk models employed. We address the problems in Hedge Fund

modelling, survey current Hedge Funds available on the market and those that have

been withdrawn. Finally, we summarise the supporting and opposing arguments for

Hedge Fund usage.

A unique value of this paper, compared to other Hedge Fund literature freely avail-

able on the internet, is that this review is fully sourced from academic references (such

as peer reviewed journals) and is thus a bona ﬁde study.

This paper will be of interest to: Hedge Fund and Mutual Fund Managers, Quan-

titative Analysts, “Front” and “Middle” oﬃce banking functions e.g. Treasury Man-

agement, Regulators concerned with Hedge Fund Financial Risk Management, Private

and Institutional Investors, Academic Researchers in the area of Financial Risk Man-

agement and the general Finance community.

Key words: Hedge Funds, risk management, risk measurement, regulation.

1. Introduction and Outline

According to the European Central Bank [Gar05], the Hedge Fund industry is grow-

ing rapidly with a total of US $1 trillion worth of assets under their control globally. A

Hedge Fund’s size is typically less than US $100 million, with nearly half under US $25

million [Gar05]. They represent a small percentage of the asset management industry

(see [Gar05]) yet they exert a disproportionately massive inﬂuence on the ﬁnancial and

economic sector in relation to their size (see Fung [FH00a]). This is due to Hedge

Funds generally using dynamic and leveraged trading strategies, which is in contrast

to Mutual Funds that typically engage in buy-and-hold strategies. Thus it is apparent

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

April 17, 2009

Hedge Funds have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence in ﬁnancial markets, yet knowledge of them

is relatively little.

In this paper we introduce Hedge Funds, attempting to ﬁrstly propose a deﬁnition

for Hedge Funds as no common consensus has yet been agreed within the Finance

community. We then explain the common investment strategies applied by Hedge

Funds e.g. event driven, long-only investment. In the next section, we survey the main

risk models applied to analysing Hedge Funds whilst also discussing the diﬃculties in

actually measuring Hedge Fund risks. Finally we ﬁnish by surveying current Hedge

Funds available on the market and famous Hedge Funds that have been withdrawn.

It is important to note that knowledge and performance of the Hedge Fund indus-

try is guarded with substantial secrecy. Consequently, the quality of information used

in any Hedge Fund study, can never be as good as those for other investment products

e.g. Mutual Funds (see Fung [FH00a],Fung [FH99a], Do et al. [DFW05]).

2. Introduction to Hedge Funds

Within the investment industry, many fund types exist: Hedge Funds, investment

trusts, unit trusts etc... yet the term Hedge Fund has no explicit deﬁnition. In fact the

European Central Bank states in its report on Hedge Funds [Gar05] that no common

Hedge Fund deﬁnition exists. Deﬁning a Hedge Fund is in fact more problematic than

it appears. To appreciate the diﬃculty in deﬁning a Hedge Fund, it is instructive to

know its brief history.

2.1. Brief History of the Hedge Funds Industry

According to Fung [FH99a], the ﬁrst ever Hedge Fund was formed by Albert Wislow

Jones in 1949, so called as the main investment strategy was to take hedged equity

investments. By hedging (the act of removing risk in some investment by taking an

investment in another (typically related) investment) Winslow was able to eliminate

some market risks.

Hedge Funds then became ﬁrst well-known after an article in Fortune(1966) mention-

ing Jones’s fund signiﬁcantly outperforming other Mutual Funds [FH99a]. Although

this article initiated wide interest in Hedge Funds, their popularity diminished as it

fell victim to the bear markets of 1969-70 and 1973-4. A decade later (1986), interest

was revived by Robertson’s infamous Tiger Fund [FH99a], which achieved compound

annual returns of 43% for 6 years after all expenses. Fung in [FH99a] corroborates

2

the impact that the publicity of Robertson’s Fund had on the Hedge Fund industry

by showing the rapid expansion of Hedge Funds and CTA funds (commodity trading

advisor funds (similar to Hedge Funds)) from 1985-97.

With numerous Hedge Fund investors and the fact that Hedge Funds were virtually

unregulated compared to other funds, a multitude of new Hedge Fund trading strate-

gies evolved, including the use of derivatives e.g. options. Now all these funds came to

be known as Hedge Funds yet many of them were using investment strategies beyond

simply “hedging” that A.Winslow ﬁrst employed (see [Gar05] for more details). To

complicate matters further, as Hedge Fund strategies developed so also did funds other

than Hedge Funds begin employing Winslow’s equity hedging strategy, thus hedging

was no longer unique to Hedge Funds. Today, the word “hedge” in Hedge Funds has

become a misnomer, more of a historical hangover from Alfred Winslow rather than a

description.

2.2. A Deﬁnition of Hedge Funds

As the European Central bank states [Gar05]:

“there is no common deﬁnition of what constitutes a Hedge Fund,it can be described as

an unregulated or loosely regulated fund which can freely use various active investment

strategies to achieve positive absolute returns”.

As the European Central Bank implies, a Hedge Fund is diﬃcult to deﬁne partly

because of a lack of clarity of agreement on its term and also due to its diverse trading

spectrum. They are typically characterised by high leveraging, derivatives trading and

short selling compared to Mutual Funds. One way of deﬁning a Hedge Fund is by

comparing the similarities and diﬀerences with Mutual Funds. In a sense Hedge Funds

are similar to any other portfolio investment in 3 respects:

• they are funded by capital from investors, rather than bank loans or other sources

of capital;

• they invest in publicly traded securities e.g. equities and bonds;

• the capital is “managed” or invested by expert fund managers.

The key diﬀerences between Hedge Funds and Mutual Funds lies in the degree of

regulation, the level and variety of risky investment strategies. Whereas Mutual Funds

are required to adhere to strict ﬁnancial regulations, including the types and levels of

3

risks, Hedge Funds are free to pursue virtually any investment strategy with any level

of risk.

Secondly, Hedge Fund investors are typically high net worth individuals or institu-

tional investors e.g. pension funds [Gar05], partly because Hedge Funds typically

require high minimum investment amounts. A graph taken from the European Central

Bank [Gar05] shows the composition of Hedge Fund investors from 1992-2004.

Mutual funds on the other hand, are typically targetted at the general public and

will accept any investor who can meet the minimum investment amount. Hedge Funds

in fact are banned from advertising and in some cases the investors are required to be

“accredited”.

A third key diﬀerence is the fund portfolio composition. As Fung [FH99a] states,

the majority of Mutual Funds are composed of equities and bonds. Hedge fund port-

folio compositions are far more varied, with possibly a signiﬁcant weighting in non-

equity/bond assets e.g. derivatives.

A fourth key diﬀerence is that the historical return characteristics and distribution

of Hedge Funds tend to diﬀer signiﬁcantly from Mutual Funds. For example, Capocci

et al.

[CH04] and Getmansky [GLM04] demonstrate that Hedge Funds empirically

display serial correlation in returns. According to Brown [Bro01], Hedge Funds do not

perform signiﬁcantly better than most investment funds; Hedge Funds between 1989-

95 earned 300 basis points below the S&P 500. However, other studies conclude that

4

Hedge Funds produce excess market returns (see [CH04],[DFW05]). A graph below

from [Gar05] gives the performance of Hedge Funds compared to key indexes. The

CSFB/Tremont index is a Hedge Fund index, the “equivalent” of the FTSE-100 for

UK stocks.

2.3. Hedge Fund Performance Benchmark Targets

With Mutual Funds only 1 type of performance benchmark typically exists; the

fund is expected to match or excel a particular index e.g. FTSE-100 index, S&P 500

index. This is an example of a relative return target, which some Hedge Funds adopt as

their benchmark. However for Hedge Funds another benchmark exists called absolute

return targets.

An absolute return target is the typical benchmark choice for Hedge Funds and is

the opposite of relative return.

It is a ﬁxed return target and the fund is expected

to match/excel it regardless of the overall market performance. Hedge fund managers

use two main approaches to achieve absolute return targets: Market Timing and the

Non-Directional approach.

Market Timing

this approach takes positions by anticipating the market trend or direction (either

5

moving up/down). This approach potentially oﬀers high returns, as demonstrated by

Georg Soros in his Quantum Fund when speculating on the British Pound in 1992.

Non-Directional

An example of Non-Directional is A.Winslow’s Hedge Fund; it is a fund that eliminates

some market risks, hence it can be considered non-directional, whilst also beneﬁtting

from relative price movements of assets. According to Fung [FH99a] the non-directional

approach has evolved over the last decade and is continuing to develop.

2.4. Hedge Fund Organisation

Hedge Funds typically prefer to concentrate their eﬀorts on the key activity of max-

imising investment return, so non-essential operations are outsourced e.g. “back oﬃce”

functions. Actual trading transactions too are outsourced to “Prime Brokers”. Prime

brokers are banks or securities ﬁrms, oﬀering brokerage and other ﬁnancial services to

large institutional clients e.g. Pension Funds. It is also worth noting that Hedge Funds

typically reside “oﬀshore” to take advantage of more favourable tax treatments and

regulations.

2.5. Fund of Hedge Funds (FOHF)

A Fund of Hedge Funds is simplistically a Mutual Fund that invests in multiple

Hedge Funds e.g 15-25 diﬀerent Hedge Funds, furthermore F3 funds or fund of FOHF

also exist. All these funds provide diversiﬁcation beneﬁts and a method of investing in

Hedge Funds without requiring the skill to personally assess Hedge Funds individually.

Also, FOHF normally have signiﬁcantly lower minimum investment levels compared to

a standard Hedge Fund, thus increasing investment access to the general public.

3. Hedge Fund Investment Strategies

The investment strategies employed by various Mutual funds are well documented,

ranging from value investing to buying growth stocks, with each having particular risk

and return implications. On the contrary, Hedge Fund investment strategies are far

less well documented and the variety of strategies are greater than for Mutual Funds.

Consequently, there is no widely accepted categorisation of Hedge Fund strategies,for

example, Stonham in [Sto99b] identiﬁes 14 Hedge Fund strategy categories whereas

Fung [FH99a] only has 7.

We now describe the 7 main Hedge Fund investment strategies as given by Fung

[FH99a], which in turn are taken from MAR (Managed Account Reports (one of the

6

oldest sources of global managed futures information )). The advantage of applying

such strategy categorisation is that diﬀerent Hedge Fund return characteristics can be

explained by them (see [FH99a]).

3.1. Event Driven

An event driven strategy means a position is taken to take advantage of price moves

arising from new market information release or events occurring. A good example of

such a strategy is to capitalise on merger and acquisition announcements, which cause

the target company’s share price to rise. An example is given below; Mark’s and

Spencer’s share price rose on announcement of a takeover by Philip Green at the end

of May 2004.

3.2. Global

The Global strategy is an all-round category for funds that invest in assets beyond

those based in their home market. Other than that, no more speciﬁc technique is asso-

ciated with this. A typical example would be a Hedge Fund investing in an emerging

market such as India.

3.3. Global/Macro

The Global/Macro strategies utilise macroeconomic analysis to capitalize on asset

price changes that are strongly linked to macroeconomics e.g. currencies, bonds, stock

indices, and commodities. As the name implies, this startegy is applied on a global

7

scale. For example, George Soross Quantum Fund reputedly made US$1 billion in 1

day on September 1992 by speculating the British Pound would exit the European

Exchange Rate Mechanism.

3.4. Market Neutral

Market neutral investment refers to funds that hedge against market risk factors,

thereby becoming ”neutral” to the market. This strategy proﬁts by speculating on

relative price movements between assets or indexes. Examples of this method include

long-short equity, stock index arbitrage, ﬁxed income arbitrage. A good example of

the long-short equity method is the classic 1949 A.W. Jones Hedge Fund, who took

long and short positions in equities.

3.5. Sector

Sector Hedge Fund investing concentrate on investing in speciﬁc sectors e.g. airlines,

telecoms, utilities sectors etc... . The investment instrument itself can be a variety of

types e.g. short selling, long and leveraged positions.

3.6. Short Selling and Long-Only

Short selling and long-only Hedge Funds are those funds which will only invest by

shorting or going long respectively.

8

4. Hedge Fund Risk Models

The necessity for Hedge Fund risk modelling and management originates from 2

areas:

• Hedge Funds experiencing some of the greatest losses ever witnessed by the in-

vestment community;

• new regulatory pressure enforcing more stringent Hedge Fund risk management.

Firstly, Hedge Funds have been responsible for numerous catastrophic losses, caus-

ing them to completely collapse and initiate a contagion eﬀect by aﬀecting numerous

economic and ﬁnancial sectors. The most notorious example of such a catastrophic

loss being the Long Term Capital Management Hedge Fund, which lost US$2.1 Billion

[Sto99b] and almost brought down the entire US ﬁnancial system.

Secondly, as already mentioned, Mutual Funds are tightly regulated whereas Hedge

Funds face little regulation. However, as Hedge Funds have gained public attention

and therefore more investment interest, this along with spectacular Hedge Fund disas-

ters have prompted increased Hedge Fund regulation.

It was not until after the 1997 Asian Currency Crisis though that regulators became

interested in regulating Hedge Fund activities [FH00a]. The IMF (International Mon-

etary Fund) initiated a study on the market inﬂuence of Hedge Funds by Eichengreen

[ES98]. This study described Hedge Funds activities and the potential problem of the

market impact of Hedge Funds.

Moreover in 2004, the Securities and Exchange Commission now required Hedge Fund

managers and sponsors to register as investment advisors under the Investment Advi-

sor’s Act of 1940. This greatly increases the number of requirements placed on Hedge

Funds e.g. keeping records and creating a code of ethics. For more information on

SEC regulation visit the SEC website http://www.sec.gov/.

9

10

We now describe some of the quantitative risk models employed in modelling Hedge

Fund risks.

4.1. Markowitz ’s Portfolio Theory

Markowitz’s Portfolio Theory (from hereon MPT) is typically applied to assets/portfolios

whose return probability distributions approximate to a Normal distribution. Although

this approximation is not strictly correct for Hedge Funds, it is still a workable risk

model. In fact Fung and Hsieh in [FH99b] apply it to rank Hedge Fund performances.

Markowitz proposed a portfolio’s risk is equal to the variance of the portfolio’s re-

turns. If we deﬁne the weighted expected return of a portfolio Rp as

Rp =

N

X

i=1

wiµi,

then the portfolio’s variance σ2

p is

N

N

σ2
p =

X

X

σijwiwj,

i=1

j=1

where

• N is the number of assets in a portfolio;

11

(1)

(2)

• i,j are the asset indices and i, j ∈ {1, ..., N} ;

• wi is the asset weight, subject to the constraints:

0 ≤ wi ≤ 1,

N

X

i=1

wi = 1;

• σij is the covariance of asset i with asset j;

• µi is the expected return for asset i.

MPT also introduces the idea of an eﬃcient frontier. For a given set of funds or assets

available to invest in, an upper concave boundary exists on the maximum portfolio re-

turns possible as risk or variance increases. Furthermore this concave relation between

risk and return incorporates the theory of expected utility concavely increasing with

risk.

Notice that MPT shows that some funds can perform lower than the risk free rate.

Naturally one wishes to choose the market portfolio which maximises return for a

given level of risk/volatility as shown.

12

4.2. CAPM (Capital Asset Pricing Model)

Capocci and Hubner [CH04] state that in the 1980s CAPM and its variants (e.g.

Jensen’s measure) were applied to Hedge fund risk measurement. The CAPM model,

based on MPT, was invented by Sharpe [Sha64]:

Ra = Rf + β(Rm − Rf ) + ε,

where

• Ra is expected return of an asset;

• Rf is the risk-free rate of return;

• Rm is the expected market return;

• ε is the error term;

• β =

σam
σmm

;

• σam is the market and asset’s covariance;

• σmm is the market’s variance.

The CAPM model is applied generally in ﬁnance to determine a theoretically appro-

priate return of an asset. It presumes that investors must be compensated for investing

in a risky asset in 2 ways 1)time value of money and 2)risk itself. The time value of

money is accounted for by the risk-free rate Rf whereas the return from risk arises from

β(Rm − Rf ). The term (Rm − Rf ) represents the expected risk premium, which is the

return obtained above the risk-free rate for investing in a risky asset. The beta term

can be considered the ”sensitivity” of the asset’s risk to market risk (both measured

by variance). Consequently more ”sensitive” assets ought to produce higher returns by

CAPM. The graph below shows how asset return is linearly related to beta and that

no beta implies a risk-free rate of return.

13

4.3. Sharpe Ratio and the Modiﬁed Sharpe Ratio

The Sharpe Ratio S, invented by Sharpe [Sha66], is based on MPT’s risk measure

(variance):

where σp is the portfolio return’s standard deviation.

S =

Rp − Rf

σp

,

The Sharpe ratio can be intepretted as ”(Return - Risk-free rate)/risk” since Sharpe

considers standard deviation to be a risk measure. The Sharpe ratio provides a portfolio

risk measure in terms of the quality of the portfolio’s return at its given level of risk. A

discussion on the Sharpe ratio can be found at Sharpe’s website (www.stanford.edu/ wf-

sharpe/).

Fung and Hsieh in [FH00b] and [FH99b] use a modiﬁed version of the Sharpe ratio

to rank Hedge Fund performance so to speciﬁcally cater for Hedge Fund return distri-

butions. This is simply the Sharpe ratio without subtracting the risk free rate from

the numerator:

Modiﬁed Sharpe Ratio=

Rp
σp

.

4.4. Jenson’s Alpha and Treynor ratio

Based on CAPM, Jensen formulated a portfolio risk measure to quantify portfolio

returns above that predicted by CAPM called α:

α = Rp − [Rf + βp(Rm − Rf )].

One can interpret α as a measure of ”excess returns” or portfolio manager’s investment

ability or i.e. ”beating the market”.

The Treynor ratio is a lesser well known portfolio ratio measure, similar to the Sharpe

ratio, but assesses portfolio performance on a CAPM model basis:

Treynor Ratio=

Rp − Rf

βp

.

Like the Sharpe ratio, the Treynor ratio can be interpretted as the ”quality” of portfolio

return for the given level of risk but risk measured on a CAPM theory basis.

14

4.5. Three Factor Model of Fama and French

The CAPM model is a single factor model that compares a portfolio with the market

as a whole. Fama and French modiﬁed this model in [FF93] to take into account 2

empirical observations about asset classes that tend to have higher returns:

• small sized companies;

• value stocks (companies with high book to market value).

Having a higher return implies a higher risk premium associated with them. The 3

factor model accounts for these higher premiums with the following equation:

Ra = Rf + βp1(Rm − Rf ) + βp2SM B + βp3HM L + ε,

where

• SMB is the diﬀerence in return for small and large sized companies;

• HML is the diﬀerence in return for high book to market value and low book to

market value companies;

• βp1, βp2, βp3 are regression gradients (slopes).

Essentially the 3 factor model is a multiple linear regression equation. Jagadeesh and

Titman in [JT93] modify the CAPM model by adding a momentum to account for

return. Fung and Hsieh in [FH04] apply both these models to long/short equity Hedge

Funds, giving regression results.

4.6. Sharpe’s Asset Class Factor Model

Sharpe in [Sha92] invented an asset factor model for risk measurement of Mutual

Funds but Fung and Hsieh in [FH97] have applied it to Hedge Funds. This model

essentially suggests that most Mutual Fund performances can be replicated by a small

number of major asset classes e.g.

large capitalisation growth stocks, large capitali-

sation value stocks, small capitalisation stocks etc...

. Using Fung and Hsieh [FH97]

notation Sharpe’s model is:

subject to:

• wk = X

xjλj;

j

Rp = X

wkFk + ǫ,

k

15

• ǫ = X

xjǫj,

j

where

• j is the asset class;

• k is the total number of asset classes;

• xj is the weighting of asset class j;

• λj is the factor loading for asset j (change in fund return/change in asset j return);

• ǫj is the error term for asset j

Thus Hedge Fund return is a weighted average of a small number of asset classes, rather

than a weighted average of a large number of individual asset returns as in MPT.

4.7. VaR (Value at Risk)

VaR (value at risk) was invented by JP Morgan in 1994 as a general risk manage-

ment tool and has now become the industry standard for risk. It has become a popular

and important risk measure primarily because of the Basel Committee, who standard-

ise international banking regulations and practises. Gupta and Liang in [GL05] applied

VaR to Hedge Funds, speciﬁcally for assessing a Hedge Fund’s suﬃcient capital ade-

quecy.

VaR tells us in monetary terms how much one’s portfolio can expect to lose, for a

given cumulative probability and for a given time horizon. For example, for a cumu-

lative probability of 99% over a period of 1 day, the VaR amount would tell us the

amount by which one would expect the portfolio to lose e.g.$100.

VaR can be calculated by simulation using historical data or some mathematical

formula. VaR can also be calculated by the “variance-covariance method” (also known

as the delta-normal method) but makes unrealistic assumptions about portfolio returns

e.g. returns are normally distributed.

5. Problems with Hedge Fund Risk Modelling

Most portfolio risk measures make unrealistic modelling assumptions, particularly

with respect to the assumed return probability distributions for mutual funds. Risk

measurement assumptions become even more unrealistic for Hedge Funds. We now

explain the diﬃculties in Hedge Fund risk measurement.

16

5.1. Non-Normal Return Distribution

As stated by Do et al.[DFW05], Hedge Fund returns do not approximate to normal

distributions, thus popular portfolio risk measures (which assume a normal distribu-

tion) are inappropriate e.g. Sharpe ratio. Furthermore Fung in [FH99a] shows that

the empirical probability distribution of monthly returns for Hedge and Mutual Funds

diﬀer signiﬁcantly.

Fung [FH99a] proposes the reason for a non-normal return distribution is a result

of the diverse trading strategies employed by Hedge Funds. Fung ﬁrstly suggests that

Mutuals engage in buy-and-hold strategies whereas Hedge Funds engage in much more

shorter term trading strategies. Secondly, Hedge Funds apply substantial leveraging,

whereas Mutuals have limited or strict regulation on leveraging. Additionally, the

relatively regulation-free investment environment of Hedge Funds leads to complex

management strategies and high performance incentives -these all aﬀect Hedge Fund

returns.

5.2. Investment Strategy and Return Distribution

It has been empirically observed that diﬀerent investment strategies signiﬁcantly

alter the return distribution, particularly the mean and standard deviation. For exam-

ple standard deviation, a common risk metric, varies from a low 2.1% in market neutral

funds to 16.3% in Global/Macro funds [FH99a]. Consequently, it has been argued it

would be better to apply separate risk measures for each Hedge Fund type (according

to its strategy), rather than treating all Hedge Funds as part of 1 homogenous class.

5.3. Hedge Fund Failure Rate

Hedge fund survival rates are signiﬁcantly lower than other funds [Gar05] and sub-

stantially vary; cumulative failure rates after 7 years range from 32-66% depending

on the Hedge Fund’s size. The table below from the European Central Bank [Gar05]

describes this:

17

Thus the inclusion of non-existent Hedge Funds poses a problem when assessing the

overall performance of Hedge Funds (similar to the survivorship bias issue with Mutual

Fund performance).

6. Hedge Funds Available On The Market

6.1. Close Man Hedge Fund

Close Man Hedge Fund is an absolute return Hedge Fund. This fund applies the

market neutral investment strategy (speciﬁcally ﬁxed income arbitrage) by investing

solely in Capital Guaranteed Bonds issued by The Royal Bank of Scotland. Thus the

fund is theoretically insulated from market risks but can still beneﬁt from price move-

ments using a variety of techniques. For this particular fund, Close Man will engage

in leveraging and using swaps (a type of derivative) to boost returns.

See Close Man’s website http://www.closefm.com/ for more detail.

6.2. RAB Capital

RAB Capital is a unique Hedge Fund in that it is one of the few UK Hedge Funds

(or more speciﬁcally FOHF) that is listed on the London Stock Exchange (ticker sym-

bol RAB.L).Their funds are accessible to the general public rather than high net worth

individuals, although RAB warns “These funds are not appropriate for a novice in-

vestor”. They specialise in a variety of absolute return funds, some of which employ

the long-only investment strategy, where assets are bought on the basis that they are

18

considered undervalued.

See RAB Capital’s website http://www.rabcap.com/ for more detail.

6.3. Thames River Capital

Thames River Capital is an absolute return based Hedge Fund, oﬀering a range of

regulated and unregulated funds. Each fund uses various investment strategies, ranging

from Global strategies (see Global Emerging Market Fund) to market neutral strategies

using high leverage.

See Thames River Capital’s wesbite http://www.thamesriver.co.uk/ for more detail.

6.4. Ikos Hedge Fund

The founder and co-owner of her own hedge fund has made Elena Ambrosiadou one

of the richest women in Britain according to the 2006 Sunday Times Rich List. This

hedge fund engages in “program trading” whereby trades are executed according to a

computer program. This method of trading has the advantage removing any subjective

decision making from speculation but can also result in investments that one would

strongly and intuitively disapprove.

Ikos focus on exchange rate investing but also

speculate in equities.

For more information on Ikos see http://www.ikosam.com/.

7. Famous Hedge Funds Withdrawn From The Market

All major funds are susceptible to collapsing, however, in the case of Hedge Funds

this is more frequent and the losses tend to be substantially higher.

It is therefore

quite informative to understand some of the spectacular Hedge Fund losses. We now

describe some Hedge Funds that were previously available on the market but have now

ceased trading.

7.1. George Soros’s Quantum Fund

Perhaps the most famous Hedge Fund investor is Soros, who in 1 day made US$1

billion on September 6, 1992, by short selling the British pound.

In 1992, Britain

was part of the ERM (European Exchange Rate Mechanism) and Soros was able to

anticipate the currency devaluation of the British Pound. Consequently by employing

the Global/Macro investment strategy, Soros managed to net a proﬁt of US$1 billion in

1 day. However years later, his fund suﬀered massive losses; in 1998 Russia’s defaulting

crisis created a loss of US $2 billion.

19

7.2. Long Term Capital Management (LTCM)

Perhaps the most notorious Hedge Fund collapse was in September 1998; LTCM

announced it had lost 44% of its investors’ capital in August alone (US$2.1 Billion)

[Sto99b]. For a detailed case study of LTCM see Stonham in [Sto99b],[Sto99a].

LTCM began trading with over $1 billion of investor capital. LTCM applied the Hedge

Fund strategy of market neutral investment;LTCM used the method of ﬁxed income

arbitrage, taking advantage of temporary changes in prices. The market neutral strat-

egy was successful from 1994-98 but in 1998 Russian ﬁnancial markets fell into crisis.

However, LTCM speculated that the situation would quickly return back to normal

again, so LTCM took large, unhedged positions. Unfortunately, Russia began default-

ing on its debts in August 1998, causing LTCM to experience losses approaching $4

billion as it was signiﬁcantly exposed to Russian government bonds. The US Federal

Government then devised a rescue plan for LTCM to avert a major US ﬁnancial crisis

and panic.

7.3. Robertson’s Tiger Management Fund

Robertson’s Hedge Fund invested by going long on undervalued stocks whilst simul-

taneously short selling what he considered overvalued stocks. For years this strategy

was extremely successful, giving annual returns of 43% from 1980-86, so he continued

applying this strategy during the technology boom. During the tech boom, Robertson

rightly considered many stocks to be overvalued and so began short selling such stocks

with the expectation overvalued stocks would eventually fall. Yet during the tech boom

a speculation bubble formed, causing the overvalued stocks to continue to rise beyond

expectation. Consequently Robertson’s fund collapsed in 2000 after heavy losses, just

before the speculative bubble itself collapsed.

8. The Case For and Against Hedge Funds

Despite the potential to provide substantial returns, it would appear conclusive

that Hedge Funds ought to be abolished or at least highly regulated. However the

issue is far more complex than one assumes. We now elaborate on the beneﬁts and

disadvantages of Hedge Funds.

8.1. The Case for Preserving Hedge Funds

It can be argued Hedge Funds provide an economic beneﬁt to markets, in particular

they aid price discovery. It has been suggested that Hedge Funds take contrarian posi-

tions; they do not engage in “herd-mentality” trading, unlike Mutual Funds. Therefore

20

Hedge Funds buy or sell assets according to the perceived fair value.

A second economic beneﬁt of Hedge Funds is that they aid competition and the eco-

nomic concept of the ”invisible hand” [DTZ05] and thrive on market ineﬃciencies.

As traders do not have instantaneous and costless access to market information, asset

mispricing or an arbitrage opportunities must occur e.g. an asset trading in 2 diﬀer-

ent markets may have diﬀerent prices. Hedge Funds take advantage of such arbitrage

opportunities and so push prices to their no-arbitrage price.

Another important economic beneﬁt of Hedge Funds is liquidity provision. Hedge

Funds typically invest in riskier assets that many investors would not consider. Hedge

Funds therefore provide much needed capital for investments.

Hedge Funds can actually reduce overall risk rather than increase it. Firstly, Hedge

Funds take on riskier investments, thereby “absorbing” some of the risk that would be

concentrated in a smaller number of funds. Additionally Hedge Funds are more willing

to invest in volatile markets, thereby “absorbing” the eﬀects of market shocks.

Hedge Funds are important as an investment product in itself. They provide sophis-

ticated investors with another vehicle for high returns that would not be available in

traditional Mutual Funds [DTZ05]. They also provide diversiﬁcation (a method of re-

ducing risk without reducing return by investing in more than 1 asset) as they represent

a diﬀerent investment class.

A second beneﬁt from a investor’s perspective is that Hedge Funds can provide ”abso-

lute” returns. Hedge Funds can achieve this because they pursue a variety of sophisti-

cated investment strategies. Traditional Mutual Funds are limited in trading strategies

due to heavy regulation.

8.2. The Case Against Hedge Funds

Rather than aid market functioning, Hedge Funds have been criticized for doing

more harm than good. Firstly, rather than contrarian investing, Hedge Funds engage

in ”herding” [DTZ05]. Notable examples include the 1992 ERM crisis and the 1997

Asian Currency Crisis.

Secondly, it was suggested Hedge Funds provide much needed capital by investing in

risky assets, yet Hedge Funds have been blamed for exhausting liquidity in the market

21

[DTZ05]. Due to Hedge Funds typically taking large positions and the trading strate-

gies they pursue, they are unable to make trades without causing a massive price moves

due to illiquidity (Fung supports this idea in [FH00a]). Additionally, Hedge Funds are

usually heavily leveraged, increasing the likelihood of illiquidity e.g.LTCM. However,

Gupta in [GL05] investigates capital adequacy using VaR (value at risk) measures and

concludes that most Hedge Funds are adequately funded.

Thirdly, Hedge Funds can prevent eﬃcient market functioning by causing market price

distortions, rather than aiding price discovery. Large volume trades can cause signiﬁ-

cant price movements, rather than price movements occurring due to company/economic

fundamentals. Fung in [FH00a] cites such examples as the 1992 ERM Crisis but con-

cludes that Hedge Funds overall do not distort prices beyond their company/economic

fundamentals.

The Hedge Fund as a viable alternative investment product has also been heavily

disapproved. For instance some quotes from leading academics on Hedge Funds:

• “If you want to invest in something where they steal your money and don’t tell

you what they‘re doing, be my guest., Eugene Fama.

• “If there’s a license to steal, it’s in the hedge fund arena”, Burton Malkiel.

In an article in Forbes (May 14, 2004) Bernard Condon claims that “You would do

better giving your money to a monkey” than investing in Hedge Funds. As a managed

investment product Hedge Funds command the highest management fees, typically

around 20%, compared to mutual funds that normally charge around 1%. Addition-

ally Hedge Fund investors have tougher withdrawal constraints.

Secondly as Fama mentions, Hedge Funds have poor transparency. Regulatory bodies

such as the SEC do not dictate the same strict rules for Hedge Funds that it does for

Mutual Funds: there are no rules on publishing records on asset holdings and ﬁnancial

performance, lack of transparency increases the chances of investors being unable to

eﬀectively assess risk.

Finally, Hedge Funds have a higher failure rate than Mutual Funds and thus a higher

credit risk. Hedge Fund face less regulation on leveraging and investment strategies,

thus are susceptible to a higher probability of default e.g. LTCM. Consequently there

22

is less likelihood of capital recovery.

9. Conclusion

Hedge Funds are clearly a complex and unique investment product that can pro-

duce extraordinary gains as well as losses. They have and continue to thrive on the

unregulated aspects of the business, spawning a variety of innovative investment tech-

niques. It has only been in the past 10 years that regulatory bodies have focussed on

Hedge Fund regulation to avert previous Hedge Fund disasters e.g. LTCM.

Despite the clear necessity to understand such a powerful investment, knowledge and

understanding of the Hedge Fund industry remains relatively poor. There is no consen-

sus on the speciﬁc deﬁnition of a Hedge Fund, very little literature is devoted to Hedge

Fund risk modelling and their various investment techniques. Consequently there is a

large scope for future research into Hedge Fund risk management.

23

References

[Bro01] SJ Brown. Hedge funds: Omniscient or just plain wrong. Paciﬁc-Basin

Finance Journal, 9(4):301–311, 2001.

[CH04] D. Capocci and G. H¨ubner. Analysis of hedge fund performance. Journal of

Empirical Finance, 11(1):55–89, 2004.

[DFW05] V. Do, R. Faﬀ, and J. Wickramanayake. An empirical analysis of hedge

fund performance: The case of Australian hedge funds industry. Journal of

Multinational Financial Management, 15(4-5):377–93, 2005.

[DTZ05] J. Danielsson, A. Taylor, and J.P. Zigrand. Highwaymen or heroes: Should

hedge funds be regulated?: A survey.

Journal of Financial Stability,

1(4):522–543, 2005.

[ES98] Mathieson D. Chadha B. Jansen A. Kodres L. Eichengreen, B. and

S. Sharma. Hedge Fund and Financial Market Dynamics.

International

Monetary Fund, 1998.

[FF93] E.F. Fama and K.R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks

and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1):3–56, 1993.

[FH97] W. Fung and DA Hsieh. Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading strate-

gies: the case of hedge funds. Review of Financial Studies, 1997.

[FH99a] W. Fung and D.A. Hsieh. A Primer on Hedge Funds. Journal of Empirical

Finance, 6(3):309–331, 1999.

[FH99b] W. Fung and D.A. Hsieh. Is Mean-Variance Analysis Applicable to Hedge

Funds? Economic Letters, 62(1):53–58, 1999.

[FH00a] W. Fung and D.A. Hsieh. Measuring the market impact of hedge funds q.

Journal of Empirical Finance, 7:1–36, 2000.

[FH00b] W. Fung and D.A. Hsieh. Performance Characteristics of Hedge Funds and

Commodity Funds: Natural vs. Spurious Biases. The Journal of Financial

and Quantitative Analysis, 35(3):291–307, 2000.

[FH04] W. Fung and D.A. Hsieh. Extracting portable alphas from equity long-short

hedge funds. Journal of Investment Management, 2(4):1–19, 2004.

24

[Gar05] D. Garbaravicius. F.,Hedge Funds and Their Implications for Financial Sta-

bility, ECB. Occasional Paper Series, 34, 2005.

[GL05] A. Gupta and B. Liang. Do hedge funds have enough capital? A value-at-

risk approach star, open. Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1):219–253,

2005.

[GLM04] M. Getmansky, A.W. Lo, and I. Makarov. An Econometric Model of Serial

Correlation and Illiquidity in Hedge Fund Returns. Journal of Financial

Economics, 74(3):529–610, 2004.

[JT93] N. Jegadeesh and S. Titman. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:

Implications for Stock Market Eﬃciency. The Journal of Finance, 48(1):65–

91, 1993.

[Sha64] W.F. Sharpe. Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under

Conditions of Risk. The Journal of Finance, 19(3):425–442, 1964.

[Sha66] W.F. Sharpe. Mutual Fund Performance. The Journal of Business,

39(1):119–138, 1966.

[Sha92] W.F. Sharpe. Asset Allocation: Management Style and Performance Mea-

surement. Journal of Portfolio Management, 18(2):7–19, 1992.

[Sto99a] Paul Stonham. Too Close To The Hedge: The Case Of Long Term Capital

Management. Part Two: Near-Collapse And Rescue. European Management

Journal,Volume 17, Issue 4 ,Pages 382-390, 1999.

[Sto99b] Paul Stonham. Too Close To The Hedge:the Case of Long Term Capital

Management LP Part One:Hedge Fund Analytics. European Management

Journal,Vol. 17,p282-289, 1999.

25

