An Optimized Microeconomic Modeling System for Analyzing  

Industrial Externalities in Non-OECD Countries 

Agnibho Roy1, Abhishek Mohan2 

1Coppell High School, Coppell, Texas, 75019, United States 

2Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science, Denton, Texas, 76201, United States 

 
Abstract:  In  this  paper,  we  provide  an  integrated  systems  modeling  approach  to  analyzing  global 
externalities  from  a  microeconomic  perspective.  Various  forms  of  policy  (fiscal,  monetary,  etc.)  have 
addressed flaws and market failures in models, but few have been able to successfully eliminate modern 
externalities that remain an environmental and human threat. We assess three primary global industries 
(pollution,  agriculture,  and  energy)  with  respect  to  non-OECD  entities  through  both  qualitative  and 
quantitative  studies.  By  combining  key  mutual  points  of  specific  externalities  present  within  each 
respective industry, we are able to propose an alternative and optimized solution to internalizing them via 
incentives and cooperative behavior rather than by traditional Pigouvian taxes and subsidies. 
 
Focus  Points  and  Keywords:  Pollution,  agricultural  economies,  global  energy,  OECD,  systems 
modeling, externalities, microeconomics, taxes, and subsidies.  
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
The  development  of  new  businesses  and 
improved  human 
industries  has  allowed  for 
resources.[1] 
productivity  and  efficiency  of 
However, 
the  repercussions  of  physical  and 
chemical processes have developed into a primary 
concern for both OECD and non-OECD nations. 
Microeconomic  analyses  of  theories  and  their 
applications  to  current  societies  prove  to  be  the 
backbone in developing a thorough plan that curbs 
air pollution, energy crises, animal endangerment, 
etc.,  but  previous  models  fail  to  account  for  the 
possibilities 
technological 
innovation  and  cleaner  energy  production.  Take 
for example the merging of superconductivity and 
TI research with microscope industries to develop 
SQUID  microscopes.  As  a  result,  technology 
emerging  from 
two 
industries has resulted in utilizing the applications 
of  quantum  mechanics  and  dissipation  less  edge 
current, allowing for essentially perfect electricity 
reusability 
behavior 
internalizes  the  externality  of  excess  bi-product 

 
gases such as CO2 and CH4 released from natural 
gas  derived  electric  power,  returning  production 
to  the  socially  optimal  level  (consider  minor 
adjustments  be  made  by  Pigouvian  taxes  or 
subsidies: government regulations that correct for 
various externalities). 
 
In  the  aforementioned  economic  scenario,  an 
externality 
to  a  consequence  of  an 
economic activity, being a cost or benefit, which 
affects  a  separate  party  that  did  not  intend  on 
incurring  the  resulting  consequence.  In  essence, 
the  social  cost  of  the  activity  is  sufficiently 
heavier than the private cost, but this effect can be 
eliminated  by  internalizing  them  to  the  point 
where the social cost is approximately equal to the 
private cost.[3] Externalities can most specifically 
be  observed  within 
the  consumption  and 
production  activities  of  third-party  groups.  The 
OECD,  or  Organization 
for  Economic  Co-
operation  and  Development,  is  an  established 
international  association  that  promotes  global 
trade  and  intercommunication,  in  addition  to 
universal economic and social well-being. OECD 

the  cooperation  of 

efficacy.[2]  Such 

that  emerge 

from 

refers 

	  

 
 

the 

and 

	  

1 

	  

nations  and  their  dynamic  relationships  with 
global  externalities  provide  essential  information 
for  optimizing  current  microeconomic  modeling 
systems and allowing other non-OECD nations to 
join  the  elite  economic  societies.[4]  Industrial 
activities are a common method used in order to 
better understand and analyze externalities on an 
international  level.  Furthermore,  the  selection  of 
the 
three  specific  externalities  provided  by 
pollution,  agricultural  economies,  and  global 
energy  consumption  are  informative  means  of 
further  optimizing  current  economic  modeling 
methods. 
 
Multiple varied modeling systems currently exist 
that  provide 
the 
influence  of  externalities,  both  positive  and 
negative,  on  global 
economic  dynamics.[5] 
However,  a  model  based  on  conceptualized  and 
diagram-based systems modeling has not yet been 
entirely  developed  for  specifically  analyzing  the 
previously  discussed  industrial  externalities  in 
conjunction  with  one  another.  Addressing  this 
area  of 
a 
microeconomic method of analyses that explicates 
the nature of business behaviors and the share of 
burdens  of  the  externalities  they  produce  within 
 

into  understanding 

this  paper 

suggests 

interest, 

insight 

propose 

an 

solution 

respective 

alternative 

their 
industries.  Additionally,  we 
combine the key mutual points of each externality 
and 
to 
internalizing them via incentives and cooperative 
behavior  rather  than  traditional  Pigouvian  taxes 
and subsidies.  
 
2.  Pollution: Industrial Analysis 
 
The  OECD  has  previously  provided  a 
the  negative 
comprehensive  assessment  of 
influences outdoor air pollution imposes upon the 
entirety of both its internal and external entities. 
After identifying the key factors in mortality and 
alterations  in  pollutant  concentration  of  OECD 
and  non-OECD  countries,  the  rapidly  expanding 
threat  of  harmful  emissions,  and  the  developing 
presence  of  global  warming,  we  believe  that  air 
pollution  requires  more  firm  regulations.  As 
various 
have 
understood the relevance of this issue, we aim to 
better  understand  and  graphically  represent  the 
influence  of  pollution  in  non-OECD  countries. 
Thus, we introduce our analysis on air pollution in 
terms  of  fine  particulate  matter  (PM2.5)  as 
concentration per cubic meter (1 atm pressure).[6]

organizations 

international 

 

	  

Figure  1: EIA provides a graph to depict the increase in the CO2 emissions over 
time by extrapolating data from previous years, which is color coded by OECD and 
non-OECD nations in addition to sub-regions within each organization.[7]  

 

2 

	  

Concentrations,  as  stated  by  the  WHO,  have 
depicted  a  clear  trend  between  OECD  and  non-
OECD nations in 2015 data: the average median 
fine  particulate  matter  concentrations  in  non-
OECD  nations  far  exceed 
those  of  OECD 
nations.[8]  In  addition,  one  needs  to  define  the 
elasticity  of  marginal  social  benefit (MSB), 
marginal  private  benefit  (MPB),  marginal  social 
cost  (MSC),  and  marginal  private  cost  (MPC) 
relative to the level of pollution for a non-OECD 
nation in order to provide key information about 
surplus and deadweight loss.  
 
Regarding  the  MPB,  businesses  benefit  from 
being  able  to  pollute  as  a  bi-product  of  their 
innovations,  as  they  lack  the  need  to  seek 
alternative  emission-reducing  methods;  however, 
the  benefit  will  decrease  over  time  due  to 
diminishing  marginal  utility. Additionally,  it  can 
be reasonable to assume that the MPB approaches 
zero  as  pollution  increases  since  it  will  have  no 
effect on business decisions at a certain threshold. 
MPC  remains  constant  (or  with  a  slope  slightly 
higher  than  zero)  due  to  some  regulation  effect 
harming 
their  pollution  emission. 
            

them 

for 

However, the MSC would indeed be much steeper 
than  the  MPC  as  an  additional  unit  of  pollution 
would harm those in proximity to the pollution in 
comparison  to  simply  harming  the  business.  For 
the MSB, the business is part of society and the 
rest of society receives no additional benefit, and 
thus, the curves are equal. 
 
The solution in proposal focuses primarily on the 
rate  of  change  of  the  benefit  to  society  from  an 
additional unit of pollution, and such can only be 
accomplished through cooperative processes. Two 
essential  partnerships  may  be  emphasized:  air 
purifying 
and 
environment-friendly  technology  with  traditional 
PM2.5 emitting businesses and industries.    
 
The  hybridization  of  cars  has  allowed  for  the 
decrease  in  emissions  from  cars  as  well  as 
improved efficiency. Data from Argonne National 
Laboratory has shown the decrease from 6500 Btu 
to 4200 Btu for a standard gasoline-powered and 
hybrid  vehicle,  respectively,  which  is  in  direct 
proportion to emissions released.[9]  
 

regulatory 

practices 

and 

 

	  

 

Figure  2:  A  graph  designed  by  the  authors  to  visually  display  the  theoretical 
behavior  of  economies  in  terms  of  marginal  benefits  and  costs.  Notice  in 
cooperative  behavior,  the  slope  of  the  MSB  is  lower  than  the  MSB  in  non-
cooperative behavior.  

3 

	  

increase 

factors  would 

As a result, improved technology and transfer to 
hybrid  transport  systems  in  non-OECD  nations 
have  the  potential  to  reduce  PM2.5  and  CO2 
emissions  by  half  per  unit.  Additionally,  air 
regulatory  controls  such  as 
the  ICAC  have 
developed  additional  controls  and  information 
aimed  to  reduce  emissions  and  foster  business 
growth.[10]  Both 
the 
magnitude  of  the  slope  of  the  MSB, as  an  extra 
unit of pollution would provide even lower benefit 
than  before.  A  summary  of  these  trends  is 
depicted 
in  Figure  2.  Further  mathematical 
analyses will be presented in the final section to 
display the improvement in the welfare economics 
as a result of this business cooperation. However, 
before  doing  so,  other  externalities  shall  be 
presented so that the final optimized model may 
be a solution to understanding a wide breadth of 
economic and environmental problems.  
 
3.  Agriculture: Industrial Analysis 

 

 
Agriculture  is  an  essential  unit  in  a 
country’s  economic  development  and  security, 
serving as a primary source of sustenance for its 
individual populations. For both OECD and non-
OECD  entities,  agricultural  production  and 
productivity  have  seen  drastic  changes  over  the 
past  few  decades,  primarily  attributed  to  both 
technological  innovation  and  enhanced  global 
interconnection  in  trading  and  affairs.  However, 
OECD countries have begun to represent a rapidly 
declining  share  of  agricultural  output  on  the 
international  scale,  with  other  such  non-OECD 
countries  encompassing  a  growing  share.[11]  The 
disparity between the two distinct groups provides 
great room in better understanding their individual 
influences  upon  global  agricultural  output  and 
efficiency,  and  more  specifically, 
the  future 
adaptive market efficiencies on the global market. 
This  understanding,  in  conjunction  with  non-
OECD  countries,  provides  an  interesting  and 
relevant  area  for  further  modeling  optimization. 
Thus,  we 
the 

introduce  our  analysis  on 

	  

4 

to  consider 

initial  externality 

agricultural  industry  by  attempting  to  internalize 
the effect of agricultural output on the following 
externalities:  water 
contamination,  wildlife 
contamination, and natural aesthetics.  
 
The 
is  water 
contamination as a result of agricultural processes. 
The  US  EPA  has  regarded  agriculture  as  the 
leading source of water quality impairment in the 
United  States  since  1994,  with  the  rate  only 
increasing,  making 
the  externality  of  great 
concern  in  terms  of  MSC.[12]  However,  the  key 
statistic to note is the nitrate contamination in the 
groundwater,  a  serious  contaminant.  Figure  4 
represents the nitrate concentration as a function 
of  time  for  the  agricultural-based,  non-OECD 
nation  of  Sri  Lanka;  the  figure  is  specifically 
divided  into  the  dry  and  rainy  seasons.  The  fact 
that the contamination differs from a cultivated to 
a  non-cultivated  area  by  over  45  milligrams  of 
N/Liter  of  water  indicates  the  inefficiency  and 
uncleanliness  of  agricultural  processes  of  non-
OECD  nations.  Furthermore,  with  the  exception 
of 3-4 points per curve, the groundwater exceeds 
the WHO cap for the highest allowable amount of 
Nitrate,  which  is  the  majority  of  each  calendar 
year. Such high levels pose a problem in society 
as 
life 
contamination, and may be a contributing factor to 
the current sixth mass extinction, where extinction 
is  occurring  100  to  1000  times  the  natural 
extinction rate.  
 
A  presented  scenario  may  also  portray 
the 
obstruction of natural aesthetics in the community 
due to agriculture, acting as another problematic 
externality.  Consider  a  society  that  lives  near  a 
forest area. Due to limited space, individuals and 
businesses will consider expanding into the region 
and  encourage  deforestation  to  cultivate  cash 
crops.  In  addition,  the  aforementioned  water 
contamination  would  affect  the  abundance  of 
potable  water  for  individuals  in  proximity.  Not 
only  will  this  provide  lower  utility  to  those 

threatens  wildlife,  primarily  sea 

it 

citizens living in proximity to this area, but it also 
would drive the house prices down in the area due 
to  the  decreased  aesthetics  of  the  surroundings, 
cutting the profits of local housing businesses.  
 
The  model  for  this  externality  is  similar  to  the 
model  stated  in  the  pollution  subsection,  where 
the MPB and MPC intersect with opposing slopes 
and the MSC is higher than the MPC due to added 
society  cost  from  the  water  contamination  and 
aesthetics.  However,  a  solution  can  be  proposed 
similar  to  the  one  in  pollution.  If  the  company 
were  to  pursue  technology  businesses  that  allow 
for  further  purification  and  contaminated  less 
water, increased nitrate content in their used water 
would  not  be  necessary  for  their  industry;  this 
would make the MSB decrease faster than before 
(assume  other  curves  follow  traditional  marginal 
cost and benefit curves and follow the same law 
 
 

of  slopes  as  pollution  cost  and  benefit  curves). 
Thus, business cooperation can drastically benefit 
both of the industries, and result in a more socially 
optimized  solution  where  the  externalities  of 
agriculture  are 
fully 
eliminated.   
 
4.  Energy: Industrial Analysis 
 

reduced  or  possibly 

With an increasing dependency on electricity, 
fossil  fuels,  and  natural  gas,  world  energy 
resources play an integral part in global economic 
stability. Also, with both OECD and non-OECD 
nations  individually  contributing  to  the  total 
primary  energy  supply,  or  TPES,  production, 
processing,  and  trade  of  energy  sources  provide 
valuable 
to  each 
country’s international economic presence.[14]  

information  with 

respect 

	  

 

 

	  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: A graph of the relationship between the Nitrogen concentration and the 
month of the year, divided into subsections of dry (Yala) and rainy (Maha) seasons. 
Important trends include the difference in Nitrate concentrations between irrigation 
and domestic wells as well as the between the two seasons.[13]  

5 

and  production, 

allocation 
relationship 

for 
Additionally, 
between 
understanding 
consumption 
from  which 
additional  insight  can  be  gained.  Despite  OECD 
countries consuming 53% of the global oil supply, 
they  have  a  low  level  of  consumption  growth. 
However, 
countries 
correspondingly  consume  47%  of  the  global 
rate  of 
supply, 
dynamic 
consumption.[15] 
relationship 
is 
the 
interdependence  between  prices,  growth,  and 
consumption,  all  of  which  are  components  that 
can be more effectively presented and understood 

The 
just  one  example  of 

although 

non-OECD 

they  have  an 

increasing 
presented 

	  

 
 

 

	  

energy 
the 

allows 

through  an  optimized  systems  model,  with 
specific regard to non-OECD entities.  
 
As non-renewable energy sources quickly deplete, 
greater  reliance  falls  onto  cleaner  and  more 
renewable  energy  sources.  Not  only  does  this 
allow  for  long-term  access  to  energy,  but  also 
eliminates the externality from harmful pollution 
emitted  by  the  energy  sources.  However,  one 
needs to keep in mind the distribution of wealth 
among nations and how unfeasible it is for non-
OECD  nations  to  extinguish  their  resources  on 
technology that permits cleaner energy usage. The 
charts  seen  in  Figure  4  below  represent  plots  of 
energy  uses 
these  nations.

stratified  by 

 

 

Figure 4: The pie charts above, excerpted from the IEA, breaks down the 
percentage use of the total energy usage of each region into the different energy 
sources. The first chart combines data from all OECD nations and the other three 
gather data from Non-OECD nations in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.[16]   
 

6 

	  

The  trends  in  these  charts  depict  what  was 
previously  mentioned  about 
the  difference 
between OECD and non-OECD nations in terms 
of  energy  usage.  First,  we  scrutinize  the  usage 
distribution of OECD nations in the year 1971. As 
expected,  the  total  energy  usage  is  only  3837 
TWh  due  to  low  population  as  well  as  low 
individual  usage  of  energy  itself.  Additionally, 
natural  gas,  oil,  and  coil  (let  us  name  these 
unclean sources) are the sources that produce the 
most  pollution  account  for  a  high  74%  of  total 
energy. 
In  contrast,  OECD  nations  have 
implemented more energy sources, in addition to 
more efficient and cleaner substitutes. In 2013, the 
usage  of  unclean  sources  has  decreased  by  over 
14%,  replaced  by  nuclear  power  and  biofuels, 
which overlook the minor decrease in hydropower 
usage. In the other non-OECD nations, we see a 
reverse trend.  
 
Firstly, analysts may be quick to realize the heavy 
biofuel  usage  of  Asian,  African,  and  Middle 
Eastern  non-OECD  nations  in  1971.  However, 
one must note that these nations were mostly in 
stage  two  or  stage  three  of  the  demographic 
transition model, meaning that they had restricted 
access to coal and other natural resources; but, in 
2013, all three non-OECD regions increased their 
natural gas and oil usage.[17] Furthermore, it can be 
assumed that the non-OECD nations are simply at 
a time lapse of about a quarter decade behind the 
progress of the OECD nations, which essentially 
means that the state of non-OECD nations in 2013 
was  essentially  the  state  of  OECD  nations  in 
1971. Thus, the importance of focusing on the key 
externalities  of  energy  bi-products  due  to  the 
increased  use  of  such  dangerous  and  non-
renewable resources in the non-OECD nations is 
entirely shown.  
 
One  may  ask  how  different  types  of  energy  can 
cause  an  economic  negative  externality.  Let  us 
consider  each  type  of  energy:  coal,  natural  gas, 
and oil release SO2, CO2, and other PM2.5 matter, 

	  

7 

to  aesthetics, 

which  as  referred  to  in  the  pollution  subsection, 
causes  major  externalities 
the 
environment,  and  health.  Additionally,  nuclear 
power  can  potentially  be  dangerous  as  it  emits 
radioactive material. The cleanest and lowest air 
pollution emitting materials are hydro energy and 
biofuels.  Hydro-energy  simply  utilizes  the  work 
done  by  a  gravitational  field  to  transfer  the 
gravitational  potential  energy  of  the  water  into 
kinetic  energy  and  then  mechanical  energy.  The 
burning of biofuels also sends out little nitrogen 
content  and  the  remaining  matter  is  absorbed  as 
nutrients by plants. However, non-OECD nations 
may not have the facilities to be able to use other 
sources,  and  with  their  high  CBR  rates,  require 
high amounts of energy daily. Thus, we fall back 
to  our  initial  proposal  on  business  cooperation. 
Let  us  discuss  the  details  of  this  and  finally 
fabricate  our  optimized 
such 
externalities.  
 
5.  Modeling System  
and Conclusions 

system 

for 

 

Although 

the  previous 

situations  have 
discussed the theoretical benefits of the model, an 
optimized  model  can  only  be  applicable  with  a 
thorough  mathematical  proof.  Let  us  discuss  the 
welfare economics of each situation and proceed 
in  order  to  highlight  the  differences.  Let  the 
equations: 

 

MPC =  ax 
MSC =  bx 
MSB1 =  −ax+y1 
MSB2 =  cx+  y1 

 

where 𝑐  >  𝑏  >  𝑎 and 𝑏+𝑐  >  2𝑎. As a result, 

the socially optimal point for cooperative behavior 
would  occur  at  the  intersection  of  the  MSC  and 
MSB.  For  non-cooperative  behavior,  one  can 
equate the functions represented by the MSC and 
MSB1  to  gain  the  socially  optimal  point.  For 

for  cooperative  behavior 

As  a  result  of  cooperative  behavior,  the  amount 
needed  to  correct  for  the  externality  and  fully 
internalize  it  is  significantly  lower  than  non-
cooperative  behavior,  allowing  businesses 
to 
allocate  the  previously  lost  income  to  more 
efficient uses. In addition, it can be noted that the 
pollution  equilibrium  point  (socially  optimal)  is 
lower 
than  non-
cooperative  behavior,  so  economically  the  non-
OECD nation will mostly reach a lower level of 
pollution.  The  area  α  represents  the  deadweight 
loss  to  the  economy  and  as  proved,  the  total 
deadweight 
foregone 
transactions is lower for cooperative behavior than 
non-cooperative  behavior.  Conclusively, 
this 
microeconomic model allows for optimal business 
performance  and  mutual  benefit  via  business 
cooperation.  
 
An  economic  analysis  has  been  provided,  but  a 
flow chart model would provide another cohesive 
method to understand these business concepts. 
 

value 

lost 

and 

of 

	  

 
 
 

 

	  

cooperative  behavior,  one  can  equate 
the 
functions represented by the MSC and MSB2. Let 
O1  and O2,  respectively,  represent  these  socially 
optimal points. Evaluating the difference between 
the  MSC  and  MPC  functions  at  the  x-value  of 

these optimal points results in the value of 𝜏! and 
𝜏!, the total amount of Pigouvian taxes needed to 
of  the  triangle  for 𝛼! and 𝛼!.  In  addition,  taking 

correct for the remaining externality and the base 

the difference between these  x-values and the  x-
values  of  the  intersection  between  the  MPC  and 
the MSB would provide the height of α1 and α2. 
The  table  represented  by  Figure  5  displays  the 
equation values in terms of a, b, and c. 
 
We  can  compare  the  values  across  cooperative 
and  non-cooperative  behavior  by  looking  simply 
at the denominators: 

(𝑎+𝑐)>(𝑎+𝑏) ∴ τ1 > τ2 

2(𝑏+𝑐)>4𝑎    and  𝑎+𝑐>𝑎+𝑏  ∴  𝛼! >𝛼! 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: The values above utilize the equations of each of the marginal benefit and 
cost  curves  for  each  graph  to  find  the  needed  Pigouvian  tax  to  correct  for  the 
externality  and  the  initial  deadweight  loss.  As  seen,  comparisons  of  the 
denominators can easily show the magnitude of the effect of cooperative behavior 
on a business.  

8 

	  

Figure  6  depicts  a  classical  model  in  which  the 
boundaries  for  perfect  cooperation  are  relayed 
according  to  the  specific  externality  situation. 
This  optimized  model,  along  with  mathematical 
substantiation,  provides  support  of  emerging 
business tactics to allow for shared welfare among 
all  sectors  and  populations  of  the  economy,  as 
well  as  maximized  profits  and  marginal  benefit. 
The  previously  overused  methods  of  Pigouvian 
taxes  are  hallmarks  of  inefficiency  when  other 
cooperative  behavior  (not  to  be  mistaken  for  a 
 
 

collusion)  could  replace  some  portion  of  that 
amount. Such reduction of taxes would allow for 
the  revenue 
to  be  allocated  elsewhere  and 
mutually  benefit  all  suppliers  and  businesses 
affiliated  with 
the  corresponding  externality.  
Additional optimized systems may build upon this 
hypothesis and provide alternative regression and 
econometric  models  to  substantiate  with  both 
quantitative and qualitative evidence.  
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

	  

Figure  6:  This  Systems  Analysis  Model  summarizes  the  optimized  model  for  the 
externality-based  solution  to  the  three  industrial  issues.  Broken  down  into  three 
primary actions and a plan of action/flow chart to follow.  

 

9 

	  

 

 

	  

6.  References 
 
[1]  Retzlaff-Roberts, Donna, Cyril F. Chang, 

and Rose M. Rubin. "Technical 
Efficiency in the Use of Health Care 
Resources: A Comparison of OECD 
Countries." Health Policy 69.1 (2004): 
55-72. Web. 

 
[2]  Morooka, T., S. Nakayama, A. Odawara, 
M. Ikeda, S. Tanaka, and K. Chinone. 
"Micro-imaging System Using Scanning 
DC-SQUID Microscope." IEEE 
Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity 9.2 (1999): 3491-494. 
Web. 
 
[3]  Barbier, Edward B. "The Concept of 
Sustainable Economic Development." 
Environmental Conservation 14.02 (1987): 
101. Web. 

 
[4]  Jesover, Fianna, and Grant Kirkpatrick. 

"The Revised OECD Principles of 
Corporate Governance and Their 
Relevance to Non-OECD Countries." 
Corporate Governance 13.2 (2005): 127-
36. Web. 

 
[5]  Barro, Robert J. "Economic Growth in a 
Cross Section of Countries." The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106.2 
(1991): 407. Web. 

[6]  Foley, Katherine Ellen. "Every Country 
Has Terrible Air Pollution, but These Are 
the World's Worst." Quartz. Quartz, 28 
Sept. 2016. Web. 

  
[7]  "U.S. Energy Information Administration 

- EIA - Independent Statistics and 
Analysis." Projected Growth in CO2 
Emissions Driven by Countries outside 
the OECD - Today in Energy - U.S. 
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 
N.p., n.d. Web. 

 
 
 

10 

 
 
[8]  "Ambient Air Pollution: A Global 

Assessment of Exposure and Burden of 
Disease." World Health Organization 
(WHO) (2016): 1-121. Print. 

 
[9] "The Economic Consequences of Outdoor 
Air Pollution - En." The Economic 
Consequences of Outdoor Air Pollution - 
En - OECD. N.p., n.d. Web. 

 
[10]"ICAC Mission." Our Mission - Institute 

of Clean Air Companies. Institute of 
Clean Air Companies, n.d. Web. 

 
[11] Moss, Charles B., and Andrew Schmitz. 

"Positive and Negative Externalities in 
Agricultural Production: The Case of 
Adena Springs Ranch." Journal of 
Agricultural and Applied Economics 
45.03 (2013): 401-09. Web. 

 
[12,13]"Agricultural Water Pollution."      

Introduction to Agricultural Water 
Pollution. Natural Resources Management 
and Environment Department, n.d. Web.  
 
[14] Alston, Julian M., and Philip G. Pardey. 
"Agriculture in the Global Economy." 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 28.1 
(2014): 121-46. Web. 

 
[15]"U.S. Energy Information Administration 
- EIA - Independent Statistics and 
Analysis." Energy & Financial Markets - 
Crudeoil - U.S. Energy Information 
Administration (EIA). N.p., n.d. Web. 
 
[16] IEA Statistics. "WORLD ENERGY  

TRENDS." Excerpt From: Energy 
Balances of Non-OECD Countries (2015): 
n. pag. Print. 

 
[17] "Agricultural Water Pollution." 

Introduction to Agricultural Water 
Pollution. Natural Resources Management 
and Environment Department, n.d. Web.  

