AN OPTIMIZATION METHOD FOR SLICE INTERPOLATION OF MEDICAL IMAGES 

1Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, WI, USA 

 

Ahmadreza Baghaie1, Zeyun Yu1 

ABSTRACT 

 

Slice  interpolation  is  a  fast  growing  field  in  medical 
image  processing.  Intensity-based  interpolation  and  object-
based interpolation are two major groups of methods in the 
literature.  In  this  paper,  we  describe  an  object-oriented, 
optimization  method  based  on  a  modified  version  of 
curvature-based image registration, in which a displacement 
field is computed for the  missing slice between two known 
slices  and  used  to  interpolate  the  intensities  of  the  missing 
slice. The proposed approach is evaluated quantitatively by 
using the Mean Squared Difference (MSD) as a metric. The 
produced 
in 
preserving sharp edges in images. 

results  also  show  visual 

improvement 

Index  Terms—  Image  Registration,  Slice  Interpolation, 

Optimization, Mean Squared Difference, Medical Images 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

Image  interpolation  is  a  well-known  research  topic  in 
image  processing  and  there  have  been  many  studies  in  this 
area  especially  in  bio-medical  applications.  With  modern 
image  modalities  (CT,  MRI,  light/electron  microscopy, 
etc.), a sequence of 2D images can be provided and used in 
building 3D models. However, the resolutions of the images 
are  often  not  identical  in  all  three  directions.  Usually  the 
resolution  in  the  Z  direction  is  significantly  lower  than  the 
resolutions  in  the  X  and  Y  directions.  For  example,  in  a 
generic  CT,  resolution  in  X  and  Y  direction,  or  in  more 
accurate  term  the  spacing,  is  between  0.5-2mm  while  the 
spacing  in  Z  direction  is  in  the  range  of  1-15mm.  This 
asymmetry  in  the  resolution  causes  problems  such  as  step-
shaped  iso-surfaces  and  discontinuity  in  structures  in  3D 
reconstructed  models.  Therefore 
slice 
interpolation  algorithm  to  augment  the  3D  data  into  a 
symmetric one is of high demand. 

utilizing 

a 

 In  general,  slice  interpolation  methods  can  be  divided 
into  two  groups:  intensity-based  interpolation,  and  object-
based  interpolation.  In  the  first  category,  the  final  result  of 
interpolation  is  directly  computed  from  the  intensity  values 
of  input  images.  Linear  and  cubic  spline  interpolation 

 

methods  are  two  examples  of  this  group.  The  major 
advantages  of  these  methods  are  their  simplicity  and  low 
computational complexity,  which lead to their  wide uses in 
practice.  As  the  final  result  is  basically  a  weighted  average 
of input image, however, these methods suffer from blurring 
effects  on  object  boundaries,  yielding  unrealistic  and 
visually unpleasing results.    

In object-based methods, on the other hand, the extracted 
information from objects contained in input images are used 
in order to guide the interpolation into more accurate results. 
There are many methods proposed in the literature trying to 
take  into  account  additional  information  of  objects  in  order 
to provide better results [1-11]. One of the first attempts for 
object-based interpolation has been made by Goshtasby et al 
[1].  Using  a  gradient  magnitude  based  approach, 
corresponding  points  between  consecutive  slices  are  found 
and  then  the  linear  interpolation  is  applied  in  order  to  find 
the in-between slices. An important assumption of this work 
is that the difference between consecutive slices is small, so 
they  restrict  their  search  for  finding  correspondence  points 
to small neighborhoods. It is obvious that this assumption is 
not  true  in  many  cases.  To  reduce  the  blurriness  of  edges, 
some  more  recent  approaches  have  been  studied,  including 
the column fitting interpolation [2], shape-based method [3], 
morphology-based  method  [6],  and  feature-guided  shape 
interpolation  method  [7].  A  comprehensive  summary  of 
common  methods  (both  intensity-based  and  object-based) 
for slice interpolation was described in [4, 5].  

An  increasingly  important  group  of  approaches  for 
image  interpolation  (object-based)  are  based  on  image 
registration.  Using  the  well-known  free  form  deformation 
non-rigid  registration  method  by  Rueckert  [8],  Penny  et  al. 
[9]  proposed  a  registration  based  method  for  slice 
interpolation.  Another  registration  based  method  was  given 
by Frakes et al. [10] by using a modified version of control 
grid  interpolation  (CGI).  More  recently,  Xu  et  al.  [11] 
described  a  multi-resolution  registration  based  method  for 
slice 
interpolation.  In  general,  registration-based  slice 
interpolation  methods  are  guided  by 
important 
assumptions.  First,  the  consecutive  slices  contain  similar 
anatomical  features.  Second,  the  registration  method  is 

two 

capable  of  finding  the  appropriate  transformation  map  to 
match  these  similar  features.  Violation  of  any  of  these 
assumptions  results  in  false  correspondence  maps,  which 
leads to incorrect interpolation results. 

In  the  present  paper,  we  develop  a  novel  method  for 
slice  interpolation  by  taking  into  account  the  well-known 
curvature-based  registration  [12,  13].  With  a  modified 
version  of  the  registration  method  and  an  assumption  of 
having  linear  movement  between  correspondence  points  in 
given  slices,  a  displacement  field  is  computed  and  the  in-
between slice is interpolated using a simple averaging of the 
registration  results.  The  detail  of  the  proposed  method  is 
given  in  Section  2,  followed  by  some  experimental  results 
along  with  quantitative  and  qualitative  evaluations  of  the 
method in Section 3. The conclusion is given in Section 4. 

 

2. METHOD 

 

Given  two  images  (reference  and  template),  image 
registration  is  to  find  a  spatial  transformation  such  that  the 
transformed  template  matches  the  reference,  subject  to  a 
suitable  distance  measure  (forward  registration)  [12].  This 
transformation  can  range  from  a  simple  translation  to  more 
sophisticated  non-rigid  free  form  deformations,  dependent 
on  the  subject  and  goal  of  registration.  Also  depending  on 
the  method,  registration  can  be  based  on  matching  a  set  of 
feature points (landmarks) or been applied directly on image 
gray values. Here we are interested in the later case. Usually 
most  of  the  registration  methods  can  be  formulated  in  term 
of  a  variational  formulation,  using  a  joint  functional  as 
follows [12]: 

 

ܧሺ࢛ሻ = ܦሾܴ, ܶ; ࢛ሿ + ߙܵሾ࢛ሿ, 

 

   

      (1) 

 

where ܦ represents  a  distance  measure  (external  force)  and 
ܵ  represents  the  rate  of  smoothness  of ࢛  (internal  force). 
The  parameter ߙ is  used  to  balance  the  two  terms.  In  this 
functional, ࢛ should  be  found  such  that  the  joint  functional 
is  minimized.  This  model  is  called  single  direction  model 
because  the  reference  image  is  fixed  and  only  the  template 
image  is  moving.  This  causes  asymmetry  in  the  results  in 
such a  way that if  we fix the  template image and  move the 
reference  image  to  match  the  template  image  (backward 
registration),  the  result  may  not  be  exactly  opposite  to  that 
of  the  forward  registration.  For  this  reason,  we  modify  this 
model  in  the  context  of  image  slice  interpolation  by 
changing the formulation to the following: 

ܧሾ࢛ሿ = ܦሾܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሻ, ܴଶሺ࢞ + ࢛ሻሿ + ߙܵሾ࢛ሿ, 

 

 

      (2) 

where  ܴଵ, ܴଶ ∶ 	Ω → ℝ    are  the  two  images  provided  as 
input and Ω ≔ ሾ0,1ሿଶ is the domain of images, ࢞ is the grid 
of  image  values  and ࢛ is  the  displacement  values  for  each 
grid point. Please note that in Equation (2), we assume that 
the slice to be interpolated, denoted by R, is in the middle of 
the  given  images.  If  R  is  an  arbitrary  slice  between  R1  and 
R2, then we first need to compute the distance from R to R1 
and R2, denoted by d1 and d2 respectively. Then we calculate 
the ration r = d1/(d1+d2), and the following equation should 
be considered for interpolating R: 
ܧሾ࢛ሿ = ܦሾܴଵሺ࢞ − ݎ࢛ሻ, ܴଶሺ࢞ + ሺ1 − ݎሻ࢛ሻሿ + ߙܵሾ࢛ሿ.        (3) 

 
Without loss of generality, we shall consider Equation (2) in 
the current paper for image slice interpolation. 

 

Several  distance  measures  for  D  have  been  proposed  in 
the  literature,  including  the  Sum  of  Squared  Differences 
(SSD),  Mutual  Information  (MI),  Normalized  Mutual 
Information (NMI), Cross Correlation (CC) and Normalized 
Gradient  Fields  (NGF)  [14].  Here  we  use  SSD  as  distance 
measure, and the above formulation can rewritten as: 

 

 

Ω

ܦሾܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሻ, ܴଶሺ࢞ + ࢛ሻሿ = ଵ
	࢛ሻ௅మ

ଶܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሻ − ܴଶሺ࢞ +
ଶ ׬ ሺܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሺ࢞ሻሻ − ܴଶሺ࢞ + ࢛ሺ࢞ሻሻሻଶ݀࢞.

ଶ = ଵ
  For  the  smoothness  term ܵ,  several  common  choices 
are  available,  such  as  elastic,  fluid,  demon,  diffusion  and 
curvature  registration  [12].  Here  we  use  the  curvature 
approach, in which the smoothness term is as follows: 

      (4) 

 

 

ܵሾݑሿ = ଵ

ଶࢣ ׬ ሺ∆ݑ௟ሻଶ݀࢞

ଶ
௟ୀଵ

Ω

 

 

      (5) 

, 

 

where  ∆  is  the  curvature  operator  and  the  summation  is 
computed over two dimensions of image and the integral is 
computed  inside  the  domain  of  images.  As  stated  in  [12], 
using  curvature  for  smoothness,  the  need  for  an  additional 
linear affine pre-registration step can be eliminated.  

In  order  to  minimize  the  above  joint  functional,  we 
compute  the  Gateaux  derivative  of ܧሾ࢛ሿ and  make  it  equal 
to zero to find the minimum point, an Euler-Lagrange PDE 
equation can be obtained as: 

 

݂൫࢞, ࢛ሺ࢞ሻ൯ + ߙࣛ௖௨௥௩ሾ࢛ሿሺ࢞ሻ = 0, 

 

 

      (6) 

 

 

where  
ࣛ௖௨௥௩ሾ࢛ሿ = ∆ଶ࢛  
݂൫࢞, ࢛ሺ࢞ሻ൯ = ൫ܴଶሺ࢞ + ࢛ሻ − ܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሻ൯. ሺ∇ܴଵሺ࢞ − ࢛ሻ +
∇ܴଶሺ࢞ + ࢛ሻሻ 
       

and 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To  solve  this  PDE,  a  time-stepping  iteration  method  is 

 

considered as follows: 
߲௧࢛࢑ା૚ሺ࢞, ݐሻ =
݂ ቀ࢞, ࢛࢑ሺ࢞, ݐሻቁ + ߙࣛ௖௨௥௩ൣ࢛࢑ା૚൧ሺ࢞, ݐሻ,									݇ ≥ 0 
with ࢛଴ = ૙. Using a finite difference approximation of the 
derivative  with  time  step  ߬  and  also  collecting  the  grid 
points  with  respect  to  a  lexicographical  ordering,  one  can 
derive a discretized version of (7) as follows: 

      (7) 

 

 

 

      (8) 

ሺ௞ሻ + ߬ࡲሬሬԦ௟

ሺ௞ାଵሻ = ࢁሬሬԦ௟

ሺ௞ሻ,				݈ = 1,2. 

ሺܫ௡ + ߙ߬ࣛ௖௨௥௩ሻࢁሬሬԦ௟
where ݈ is  the  parameter  representing  the  dimension  index. 
For  more  information  about  how  to  compute ࣛ௖௨௥௩ ,  the 
reader 
the 
optimization  process,  a  simple  averaging  of  the  two 
transformed  input  images  provides  us  with  the  missing  in-
between image. 

to  [12,  13].  After  finishing 

is  referred 

 

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

 

To  validate  the  proposed  method  for  slice  interpolation 
in  medical  images,  several  tests  have  been  conducted.  The 
results of the proposed method are compared with two other 
methods,  in  both  subjective  and  objective  aspects.  As  a 
metric,  Mean  Squared  Difference  (MSD)  is  used  for 
comparison.  Assuming ܫ௢௥௚  and ܫ௜௡௧  as  original  image  and 
interpolation image respectively, with the size of ݉ × ݊, we 
define MSD as follows: 

 

ܯܵܦ = ଵ

௠×௡ ࢣ ࢣ ሺܫ௢௥௚ሺ݅, ݆ሻ − ܫ௜௡௧ሺ݅, ݆ሻሻଶ

௡
௝ୀଵ

௠
௜ୀଵ

 

      (9) 

the 

in-between  slice  by  using  both 

 
In  the  first  test,  three  consecutive  slices  as  in  Fig.  1(a) 
are  used.  Taking  the  first  and  third  slices  as  inputs,  we 
compute 
linear 
interpolation and the proposed method. Fig. 1 (b) shows the 
interpolation results (top) using the two  methods as  well as 
the computed difference images (bottom) with respect to the 
second  image  in  Fig.  1(a).  The  MSDs  computed  are  84.20 
and  54.96  for  linear  and  proposed  methods  respectively. 
Fig.1  (c)  gives  the  displacement  fields  computed  after 
registration,  for  both  horizontal  and  vertical  directions. 
Bright  and  dark  shades  represent  positive  and  negative 
displacement  vectors  respectively,  while  gray  shades  for 
displacements near zero.  

As  can  be  seen  from  the  slices,  the  difference  between 
slices is due to the movement of the heart near the centers of 
these  images.  Using  linear  interpolation,  the  movement  of 
heart  is  not  captured,  resulting  in  blurred  edges  in  the 

interpolated  slice.  By  comparison,  the  registration-based 
method  captures  the  movement  well  and  the  final  result  is 
highly  similar  to  the  original  one  (middle  image  in  Fig. 
1(a)). As a result, the MSD error is significantly reduced and 
the interpolation result is much sharper.  

 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

Fig. 1 (a) Three consecutive images. The first and third images 
are used for interpolation. To produce the results the parameters 
values are set as ߬ = 0.03,ߙ = 100. (b) Top row: interpolation 
results for linear and proposed method. Bottom row: difference 
images of the results and reference image (middle image in (a)). 
(c) Displacement fields for horizontal and vertical directions 
using the proposed method. 

 
To  further  demonstrate  the  strength  of  the  proposed 
method, we apply the same procedure to the second example 
containing three brain images as shown in Fig. 2 (a). Using 
the  first  and  third  slice,  the  interpolation  results  are 
produced. Besides the linear interpolation, we also compare 
the proposed method with the original curvature registration 
based  technique  [12],  called  non-modified  method  below. 
Fig.  2(b)  shows  the  results  of  interpolation  as  well  as  the 
computed  difference  images.  The  MSDs  are  71.65,  45.36 

the  result  of 

and  42.72  for  linear,  non-modified  and  proposed  method 
respectively.  As  can  be  seen, 
linear 
interpolation has uncertain and highly blurred edges. Result 
of  non-modified  method  is  significantly  better  than  linear 
interpolation,  in  terms  of  MSD  but  due  to  nonlinear  nature 
of image registration and optimization process, we still have 
blurred  edges.  In  comparison,  the  proposed  method  gives 
much  sharper  edges.  This  becomes  more  obvious  in  the 
difference  images  where  blurred  edges  yield  widened 
regions of dissimilarity. Also, it should be mentioned that, in 
the non-modified method, only one of the images is moving. 
As  a  result,  more  iterations  of  optimization  are  needed  for 
convergence, and thus more computational time is required. 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

Fig. 2 (a) Three consecutive images. The first and third images 
are used for interpolation. To produce the results the parameters 
values are set as ߬ = 0.05,ߙ = 100. (b) Top row: results of 
interpolation by using the linear, non-modified and proposed 
methods respectively. Bottom row: difference images of the 
results and original image (middle in (a)). 

 

4. CONCLUSION 

 

In this paper, a new registration-based slice interpolation 
method  is  proposed.  A  modified  version  of  curvature 
registration  method  has  been  used  with  the  assumption  of 
linear  displacements  between  corresponding  points  in  two 
input  images.  The  obtained  displacement  fields  for  the  two 
images are utilized to produce the missing in-between slice. 
In  comparison  to  both  linear  interpolation  and  the  non-
modified  registration-based  method  [12],  the  proposed 
method 
less 

lower  MSD 

produces 

values 

and 

blurred/uncertain  edges.  The  current  implementation  was 
performed in Matlab, which takes a total of ~30 seconds for 
an  image  of  250*250  pixels.  An  ongoing  effort  is  to 
implement  the  algorithm  in  C/C++,  which  is  expected  to 
consume  much  less  computational  time.  Part  of  our  future 
work  will  be  an  extension  of  the  linear  displacements 
between  images  into  higher  order  polynomial  formulation 
that involves more than two adjacent slices. 

  

5. REFERENCES 

 

[1]  A.  Goshtasby,  D.  A  Turner,  and  L.  V  Ackerman, 
“Matching  of  tomographic  slices  for  interpolation.,”  IEEE  Trans 
on medical imaging, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 507–16, Jan. 1992. 

[2]  W.  E.  Higgins,  C.  J.  Orlick,  and  B.  E.  Ledell,  “Nonlinear 
filtering  approach  to  3-D  gray-scale  image  interpolation.,”  IEEE 
Trans on medical imaging, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 580–7, Jan. 1996. 

[3] G. J. Grevera and J. K. Udupa, “Shape-based interpolation 
of  multidimensional  grey-level  images.,”  IEEE  Trans  on  medical 
imaging, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 881–92, Jan. 1996. 

[4]  G.  J.  Grevera  and  J.  K.  Udupa,  “An  objective  comparison 
of  3-D  image  interpolation  methods.,”  IEEE  transactions  on 
medical imaging, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 642–52, Aug. 1998. 

[5]  G.  J.  Grevera,  J.  K.  Udupa,  and  Y.  Miki,  “A  task-specific 
evaluation  of  three-dimensional  image  interpolation  techniques.,” 
IEEE Trans on medical imaging, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 137–43, 1999. 
[6]  T.  Y.  Lee  and  W.  H.  Wang,  “Morphology-based  three-
dimensional  interpolation.,”  IEEE  Trans on  medical  imaging,  vol. 
19, no. 7, pp. 711–21, Jul. 2000. 

[7]  T.-Y.  Lee  and  C.-H.  Lin,  “Feature-guided  shape-based 
image interpolation.,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 
21, no. 12, pp. 1479–89, Dec. 2002. 

[8]  D.  Rueckert,  L.  I.  Sonoda,  C.  Hayes,  D.  L.  Hill,  M.  O. 
Leach,  and  D.  J.  Hawkes,  “Nonrigid  registration  using  free-form 
deformations:  application  to  breast  MR  images.,”  IEEE  Trans  on 
medical imaging, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 712–21, Aug. 1999. 

[9] G. P. Penney, J. a Schnabel, D. Rueckert, M. a Viergever, 
and W. J. Niessen, “Registration-based interpolation.,” IEEE Trans 
on medical imaging, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 922–6, Jul. 2004. 

[10]  D.  H.  Frakes,  L.  P.  Dasi,  K.  Pekkan,  H.  D.  Kitajima,  K. 
Sundareswaran,  A.  P.  Yoganathan,  and  M.  J.  T.  Smith,  “A  new 
method for registration-based medical image interpolation.,” IEEE 
Trans on medical imaging, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 370–7, Mar. 2008. 

[11]  J.  Leng,  G.  Xu,  and  Y.  Zhang,  “Medical  image 
interpolation based on multi-resolution registration,” Computers & 
Mathematics with Applications, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2013. 

[12] B. Fischer and J. Modersitzki, “A unified approach to fast 
image  registration  and  a  new  curvature  based  registration 
technique,” Linear Algebra and its Applications, vol. 380, pp. 107–
124, Mar. 2004. 

[13] J. Modersitzki, Numerical Methods for Image Registration 
(Numerical  Mathematics  and  Scientific  Computation).  Oxford 
university press USA, 2004. 

[14]  J.  Modersitzki,  FAIR:  flexible  algorithms  for  image 

registration, vol. 6. SIAM, 2009. 

