4
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
7
2

 

 
 
]
E
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
7
7
6

.

2
0
4
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Analysis of Barcode sequence features to ﬁnd anomalies due to
ampliﬁcation Bias

Chandrima Sarkar, Raamesh Deshpande, Chad Myers

Department of Computer Science, University of Minnesota at Twin cities, Minneapolis,
MN, USA

Abstract

In this paper we aim at investigating whether barcode sequence features can predict the read count
ambiguities caused during PCR based next generation sequencing techniques. The methodologies we used
are mutual information based motif discovery and Lasso regression technique using features generated
from the barcode sequence. The results indicate that there is a certain degree of correlation between motifs
discovered in the sequences and the read counts. Our main contribution in this paper is a thorough
investigation of the barcode features that gave us useful information regarding the signiﬁcance of the
sequence features and the sequence containing the discovered motifs in prediction of read counts.

Introduction

Next-generation DNA sequencing (NGS) technologies, such as the 454-FLX (Roche), SOLiD (Applied
Biosystems) and Genome Analyzer (Illumina) have transformed the landscape of genetics with their
ability to produce thousands of megabases of sequence information in a very short time [14]. These kinds
of sequencing techniques permit the rapid production of large and small sequence data sets. Among the
popular strategies, Multiplexing technique is the one which allows parallel sequencing of many diﬀerent
samples [10, 15]. In this technology a unique sample speciﬁc ﬁxed length marker sequence known as the
’barcode’ is added to the DNA that is to be sequenced. Reads obtained after sequencing are sorted into
sample libraries via detection of the appropriate barcode. Constructing mixtures of bar-coded or tagged
DNA templates for sequencing can prove to be extremely useful in many applications [5, 19]. However,
though these technologies provide a great deal of beneﬁts such as detection of nucleotide one at a time
, accurate sequencing of homopolymer regions and many more, there are disadvantages too, such as
short-read length causing a limitation in situations where no reference sequence is available to align,
assign and annotate the short sequences generated. Another major drawback which all the PCR based
NGS systems share is the ampliﬁcation bias. It has been observed that barcode-dependent bias is highly
prominent in DNA and RNA detection and expression proﬁling using multiplexing technology [3, 4]. For
production of high quality multiplex amplicon libraries for high-throughput sequencing it is therefore
extremely important to detect the actual cause of this anomaly. A lot of studies have addressed this
problem [2–4, 6, 17] from various dimensions. However, according to the best of our knowledge, none
of the previous studies have tried to analyse the barcode sequence features which may prove to be the
potential cause behind this existing bias. In this paper we try to analyse the characteristic features of the
barcode sequences and classify them if any observable diﬀerence exists causing the diﬀerential behaviour
during the PCR ampliﬁcation. We consider the read counts as the expression proﬁle directly indicating
the growth rate for a given condition.

To Summarize, The main aim of this paper can be given as -
• Predict read counts using methods such as classiﬁcation and prediction technique and mutual

information based motif extraction.

2

Figure 1. Barcode insert in a typical yeast genome

• Predict if Barcode sequence features are responsible for ampliﬁcation biases in PCR based multi-

plexing techniques.

Background

Due to the availability of whole genome sequences over the past decade, there has been major develop-
ments in the reverse genetics approaches. This technological surge has caused dramatic changes to the way
gene functions are analysed. The ultimate reverse genetics tool, whole-genome deletion mutant libraries,
were ﬁrst created for the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae [8, 22]. This tool helps in predicting
the open reading frames in the budding yeast genome which can be used for analysing the phenotypes of
their deletion mutants. New genes involved in various biological pathways can now be predicted with the
help of buddying yeast deletion libraries [16]. Another signiﬁcant application of the deletion libraries is
proﬁling drug sensitive yeast mutants for targeting the therapeutic compounds for analysing drug-gene
interactions [9]. The construction of the budding yeast deletion libraries incorporated the ingenious idea
of molecular barcodes, for deletion cassette [18]. With the help of these barcodes the mutants could
be phenotyped by allowing thousands of mutant strains to be pooled and analyzed together in a highly
parallel fashion. The barcodes can be easily ampliﬁed by PCR from genomic DNA extracted from the
yeast cells in the mutant pool. The amounts of barcode PCR produces, serve as a quantitative measure
of the cell number of each deletion strain in the mutant pool. Traditionally, oligonucleotide microarrays
have been used to deconvolute the identity of the strains in the mutant pool and quantify the amount of
each barcode PCR product. In one of the recent studies, deep sequencing was found to perform equally
well in this regard [20]. Barcode-based analyses of pooled mutants has been observed to contribute more
signiﬁcantly in improving the throughput of screens, reduce the amount of reagents used, and avoid the
problems associated with strain cross-contamination than when compared to one-by-one screen of indi-
vidual deletion mutants. The most frequently analyzed phenotype of pooled mutants is the growth rates,
or ﬁtness, of the mutant strains.From ﬁtness proﬁling of mutants under hundreds of growth conditions it
has been observed that 97% of the genes in the budding yeast genome are required for optimal growth
under at least one condition [11]. In addition to phenotyping single-gene mutants, barcode-based analysis
has also been used to study gene-gene interactions.

Barcodes have been utilized before as short genetic markers for multiple purposes such as identifying
species [12], studying past diversity of the Earth’s biota [13]. One of the unique purpose where barcodes
have been extensively used is knockout deletion of genes from yeast strains.

Process of barcode generation during Yeast gene knockout deletion

In the process of knockout deletion of genes from yeast strains, each gene is systematically deleted in the
yeast genome. When completed, the result will be a number of mutant strains, each with a diﬀerent gene
deleted. However, rather than simply deleting the gene, a barcode is inserted which is a unique sequence
of DNA for each strain. An analogy to barcodes can be made with the products packaging, used for
checking out in retail shops, since a barcode is meant to be used as a unique identiﬁer for each item.
For the yeast barcode deletions, the unique identiﬁer is composed of two unique DNA sequences called
”up-tag” and ”down-tag”. Homologous recombination can be used to replace each gene with a unique
barcode insert so that each strain had one gene deleted and replaced with its sequence-speciﬁc barcode

3

insert. 1 shows a Prototype of a barcode insert used to replace genes in the yeast genome. The two
arrows represent PCR primers, the series of N’s represent the unique barcode sequences and the marker
gene permits selection of cells that contain the insert. The up-tag consists of the 20 nucleotides on the
left side and the down-tag consists of the 20 nucleotides on the right. The red PCR primer sequence
would be the same in every barcode insert as would the green PCR primer sequence.

After each strain has its gene deleted, the challenge is to determine the functional consequences of all
the deletions. For doing that in a high throughput method rather than each strain individually mutants
are screened eﬃciently. About 500 mutants are put into a common ﬂask and two PCR primers is used
to amplify all 500 barcode inserts from a mixture of genomic DNA extracted from an aliquot of the 500
strains [1]. These PCR products are tagged with a red dye. The cells were allowed to grow over an
extended period of time. During this time, strains with deleted genes needed to maintain normal growth
rate would constitute a reduced percentage in the growing population. At various times, aliquots of cells
are removed and the genomic DNA is extracted and ampliﬁed using the same two PCR primers. The
PCR products used in the later condition are tagged with a green dye. Genomic DNA from an aliquot
of this initial population of cells is used as template for PCR using the two primer sequences shared by
each of the deletion strains. These PCR products are labeled red. After a period of time, an aliquot of
cells are again used for template of PCR using the same two PCR primers. These PCR products are
colored green.

Barcode yeast experiments require a unique DNA microarray. Instead of spotting the coding DNA
for each gene, the uptag and downtag for each deletion was spotted onto the glass. The two PCR
products (red from time zero and green from a later time) are mixed together and incubated with the
DNA microarray. For each strain there could be three possible lableing patterns for its associated uptag
and downtag given in ﬁgure 2.

Figure 2. Three possible labelling patterns for its associated up-tag and down-tag

From ﬁgure 2 one can make the following conclusions
• A strain growing a yellow spot indicates that its proportion of the initial and ﬁnal total population

was the same.

• A strain growing a red spot indicates that the strain grew slower than most other cells. Hence, its
uptag and downtag spots showed as red since this strain was present at a higher concentration in
the initial population than in the later population.

• A strain growing a green spot indicates that the strain grew faster than most other cells. Hence,
its up-tag and down-tag spots appeared more green than yellow since its increased rate of growth
resulted in an increased representation of the total population.

Figure 2 shows DNA microarray showing yellow, red and green spots for cells that maintained the
most common growth rate, decreased growth rate or increased growth rate, respectively. If a strain’s
growth rate were truly aﬀected by the deletion, then both the uptag and downtag spots should exhibit
similar results.

4

Bias incorporated during PCR ampliﬁcation

A major drawback which all the PCR based NGS systems share is the ampliﬁcation bias. It has been
observed that barcode-dependent bias is highly prominent in DNA and RNA detection and expression
proﬁling using multiplexing technology [3, 4]. For applications where many cycles of PCR are required
for sensitive detection, bias and noise reduction are crucial for accurate quantication.
In one of the
recent studies [21], an in-depth quantitative measurement of PCR ampliﬁcation bias, resulting from the
use of barcodes has been conducted. This research attempted to adapt previous barcoding strategies
to multiplexed sequencing of small RNA used index sequences placed at the distal end of the 5 adapter
in the Illumina small RNA library protocol. The observations made in that study was that despite a
number of iterations of the design there was a consistent failure in avoiding PCR ampliﬁcation bias when
identical samples with diﬀerent barcodes were compared. Though in this study the authors showed that
introducing the barcode during the PCR instead of before the PCR step using diﬀerentially, barcoded
primers does not result in bias, it remained unclear as to It is unclear as to why pre-PCR protocol for
small RNA produces biased results, while the TruSeq protocol for mRNA/dsDNA produces unbiased [21]
results.

Methods

Dataset used

Data Set used is SGA Barseq data for Yeast strains. The data contain 3880 unique yeast strains with
3880 unique barecodes. Total number of features generated from the barcodes is 275 which are considered
as the predictor variables. The features are given below are all possible Single nucleotide frequencies,
double nucleotide frequencies, Triple nucleotide frequencies, melting point of each nucleotides, longest
2-mers of repetition of A, C, T and G, longest 3-mers of repetition of A, C, T and G, repetition of AT,
repetition of CG, frequency of last 3 base pairs of the barcode sequence and ﬁrst three base pair of the
sequence (see ﬁgure 11). Response variable is the read count which has been considered for classiﬁcation
and prediction purpose. All the predictor variables are used to detect the response pattern to see which
feature / predictor variable causes reads of high count. Motif discovery has been performed over the
original barcode sequence features. The input data for Motif discovery is the yeast strain Identiﬁer
proﬁle and the expression proﬁle which is the read counts in this project.

Proposed approach

The purpose of this project is to detect the probable causes behind PCR ampliﬁcation bias which is
observed in Barcode sequences used for DNA analysis of Yeast. This analysis is entirely based on the
sequence features of the barcodes used and does not considers any kind of contribution in the bias from
any steps of ligation or PCR. Our target in this project is two fold -

• Building a prediction model using all possible features of the barcode sequences and analyze if this

model can bring about a prediction in the read count.

• Important motif discovery in the barcode sequences based on Mutual information [7] and analysing

their probable contribution in the prediction model to detect the cause of the bias.

The prediction technique used is regression analysis - Lasso regularization method which aims at
reducing the number of redundant predictors and identifying important predictors from the set of all
features generated from the bar code sequences. Another important technique has been used is the
motif discovery. With the help of this technique important motifs and their pattern of occurrence can be
discovered. The classiﬁcation and prediction technique used in this paper is the lasso regression technique

5

and mutual information based motif discovery from barcode sequences. Lasso is a regularization technique
for performing linear regression. The main motive behind using Lasso is that

• Lasso reduces the number of predictors in a regression model. In our data this will help eliminating
those variables/features of barseq which produces minimum or no signiﬁcant contribution for the
prediction of read counts.

• Lasso identiﬁes important predictors and select among redundant predictors. This will allow us

concentrate upon sequence feature which causes an increased read counts.

• Produce shrinkage estimates with potentially lower predictive errors than ordinary least squares.

Lasso includes a penalty term that constrains the size of the estimated coeﬃcients. Lasso can also be
called a shrinkage estimator since it generates coeﬃcient estimates that are biased to be small. Never-
theless, a lasso estimator can have smaller mean squared error than an ordinary least-squares estimator
when you apply it to new data.For a given value of lambda, a nonnegative parameter, lasso solves the
problem given in equation 1. where N is the number of observations, yi is the response at observation i,
xi is data, a vector of p values at observation i, λ is a positive regularization parameter corresponding to
one value of λ, The parameters β0 and β are scalar and vector respectively.

 1

2N

min
β0,β

N(cid:88)

(cid:0)yi − β0 − xT
i β(cid:1)2

p(cid:88)

+ λ

| βj |

i=1

j=1



(1)

A 10 fold cross validation is used while using lasso to eliminate overﬁtting of the model with the data
used. Manual cross validation has also been used where data is divided into 7:3 ratio for prediction of
read counts.

Motif discovery has been performed over the original barcode sequences in the past researches. This
approach infers motifs from gene expression data that aims at making as few a prior assumptions as
possible by quantifying the dependency between the presence or absence of a given motif in a regulatory
region and the expression of the corresponding gene [7]. The concept of mutual information is used for
discovering motifs whose patterns of presence/absence across all considered regulatory regions are most
informative about the expression of the corresponding genes. Thus, knowing whether such a motif is
present or absent within the regulatory region of a given gene provides signiﬁcant information regarding
the expression of that gene which is in our case the read counts. By discovering important motifs from
the barcode sequences it can be possible to predict which motif characters are responsible for causing a
bias during ampliﬁcation. The mathematical formulation of mutual information is given in equation 1
where p(i, j) is the joint probability distribution function of the random variables i and j, and p(i) and
p(j) are the marginal probability distribution functions of i and j respectively.

I(motif ; expression) =

P (i, j)log

P (i, j)

P (i)P (j)

(2)

A detailed description of the results obtained from the above two approach is given in the result

section.

Results

First the barcode sequences were analyzed using FIRE tool [7]. In this approach each barcode sequence
bases are used for ﬁnding seed motifs in order to generate motif proﬁle. Then an expression proﬁle is
created using the read counts for all the 3880 barcode sequences. The FIRE algorithm uses the motif

2(cid:88)

Ne(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

6

Figure 3. Average read counts. Red dots shows the boundary for reads greater than 800. It can be
seen that approximately 80 % of sequence having the average read counts greater than 800

Figure 4. Actual sequence reads plotted along with the scatter plot of sequence indexes containing all
3,4,5,6,,7 and 8 mer motifs

Figure 5. Distribution of reads with sequence containing motifs compared with distribution of the
reads of all sequence

7

Figure 6. 8 -mer summery of the motif discovery tool FIRE showing under and over representation of
the motifs in the sequences based on the reads

Figure 7. Lasso Regression Plot with 229 features

Figure 8. MSE vs Lambda in Lasso Regression with 299 features

8

Figure 9. Lasso Regression Plot with 275 features

Figure 10. k-mer Motifs obtained using mutual information based proﬁling

proﬁle and the expression proﬁle to generate mutual information for each motif. Then the list of motifs
discovered is sorted and sort listed for choosing those motifs which has highest mutual information. In
other words, those motifs are selected whose proﬁles are highly informative about the behavior proﬁle
which is the read counts.The result is a list of motifs that are generally over- or under-represented in
the sequences associated with certain behavior categories/bins. The motifs that we discovered from the
barcode sequences are shown in ﬁgure 10

From all the k-mers that we obtained where k is 3,4,5,6,7 and 8 80% motifs discovered were 7-mers.
The motifs discovered are diverse in their A,C,G,T features but a frequent occurrence of CCG , GCC ,

9

TAT, ATAT, has been observed. Most of the Motifs either starts with A or C. However, the signiﬁcance
of such patterns can be analyzed only after a thorough examination of the motifs. In ﬁgure 6 a snap shot
of 8-mer motif proﬁle as obtained from FIRE has been provided. This ﬁgure shows the yellow regions
which represents over-representation of the motifs corresponding to a higher read count (read box on top
right). Over representation of these motifs corresponds to active motifs i.e. represent putative functional
instances and under representation denotes motifs that are more likely to be non-functional.

After discovering the motifs with the highest mutual information we analyzed them with our actual
barcode sequence. We parsed the sequences in order to record the possibility of occurrences of the motifs
in the barcodes and the read counts associated with the original barcode sequences. Figure 3 represents
a bar graph with the average read measure for all the sequences that contained the motifs. From ﬁgure
3 we can see that approximately 80% of the sequences containing motifs have more than 800 average
read counts which is much higher as compared with low read counts considering the range of 10 - 2500.
Also in ﬁgure 4 we have plotted the actual reads of all the sequences vs the scatter plot (red dots) of the
sequences which contained the motifs. We can observe a dense red dotted area near the region of high
reads. This may indicate that sequence containing the motifs have a tendency for higher read counts.

In ﬁgure 5 we plotted the distribution of the reads corresponding to all the sequences to compare
it with the distribution of the sequences containing motifs. This ﬁgure depicts an interesting outcome
where we see that the 46 sequences have the same distribution as that of the entire population i.e. the
entire barcode sequences. This can indicate the fact that though most of the motifs shows a higher read
count , some motifs are present with lowers the read counts as well. These outliers are some thing which
can be worth investigating.

After the motif discovery, we generated sequence features based on A,C,G,T base pairs of the barcode
sequences. The features that we generated are given in ﬁgure 11. We generated 275 features and applied
Lasso Regression technique for predicting the features which has the maximum contribution in classifying
the read counts. At ﬁrst we applied this prediction algorithm over 229 raw features that had been derived
from the barcode sequences. The results of the lasso plot of L1 norm vs the penalty term lambda (given in
ﬁgure 7) and lasso plot of mean square error(MSE) vs lambda (given in ﬁgure 8) shows that it was able to
predict the best value of lambda which gave approximately 15 features that contribute most in prediction
with the minimum MSE. The over all correlation between the actual reads and the predicted reads we
obtained, from diﬀerent values of lambda ranges from 0.16 to 0.28. Our next step was to incorporate the
motifs as additional features along with the previously analyzed 229 features using lasso technique. We
added 46 more predictors to our sequence feature data. This value was binary. If a feature contains the
motif the data would be 1 and if not 0. The result of lasso over 275 features is shown in Figure 9. The
correlation between the predicted reads and the actual reads was obtained - which range from 0.16 to
0.3410. This correlation measure is slightly better than the previously obtained result where motifs were
not used as the predictors. These results were obtained from analyzing the barcode features using the
two methodologies mentioned in the previous section. Further analysis is done in the Discussion section.

Figure 11. Sequence features generated from the barcode sequences

10

Discussion

The Next-generation sequencing have revolutionized modern genomics as well as have increased our
understanding about DNAs and RNAs in particular [3]. However, this still-growing ﬁeld inevitably
creates some biases in the vast amount of data generated. Analyzing the reason behind these biases is
a crucial task especially when using multiplexing techniques with barcodes for accuracy and sensitivity.
The main aim of our project has been an attempt in solving this riddle. Though a lot of trial and error
with PCR cycles and ligation procedure has been done previously to reduce this bias, but no studies have
been conducted to the best of our knowledge which have analyzed barcode sequences. We have performed
a classiﬁcation prediction based technique as well as mutual information based motif discovery technique
in order to analyze the barcode features. This analysis shows that there is correlation existing between
the barcode features and the read count. Most importantly we could ﬁnd the motifs or sub-sequences that
contributed to that correlation. It clearly proves that these motifs play an important role in determining
the read counts. Also we could analyze those sequence features which did not have any inﬂuence on
predicting the read counts. This is also a clear indication that the motifs discovered are important since
the correlation between the predicted reads and the actual reads increased when the motifs were used as
additional predictors. However, the actual pattern in which these motifs behave could not be analyzed
due to time constraint of this project. Given more time it is not impossible to generalize the motif
patterns which might predict the way the read counts behave.

References

[1] http://www.bio.davidson.edu/courses/genomics/method/barcode.html.

[2] D. Aird, M.G. Ross, W.S. Chen, M. Danielsson, T. Fennell, C. Russ, D.B. Jaﬀe, C. Nusbaum, and
A. Gnirke, Analyzing and minimizing pcr ampliﬁcation bias in illumina sequencing libraries, Genome
Biol 12 (2011), no. 2, R18.

[3] S. Alon, F. Vigneault, S. Eminaga, D.C. Christodoulou, J.G. Seidman, G.M. Church, and E. Eisen-
berg, Barcoding bias in high-throughput multiplex sequencing of mirna, Genome Research 21 (2011),
no. 9, 1506–1511.

[4] D. Berry, K.B. Mahfoudh, M. Wagner, and A. Loy, Barcoded primers used in multiplex amplicon
pyrosequencing bias ampliﬁcation, Applied and environmental microbiology 77 (2011), no. 21, 7846–
7849.

[5] J. Binladen, M.T.P. Gilbert, J.P. Bollback, F. Panitz, C. Bendixen, R. Nielsen, and E. Willerslev,
The use of coded pcr primers enables high-throughput sequencing of multiple homolog ampliﬁcation
products by 454 parallel sequencing, PLoS One 2 (2007), no. 2, e197.

[6] J.A. Casbon, R.J. Osborne, S. Brenner, and C.P. Lichtenstein, A method for counting pcr template
molecules with application to next-generation sequencing, Nucleic acids research 39 (2011), no. 12,
e81–e81.

[7] Olivier Elemento, Noam Slonim, and Saeed Tavazoie, A universal framework for regulatory element

discovery across all genomes and data types, Molecular cell 28 (2007), no. 2, 337–350.

[8] G. Giaever, A.M. Chu, L. Ni, C. Connelly, L. Riles, S. V´eronneau, S. Dow, A. Lucau-Danila, K. An-
derson, B. Andr´e, et al., Functional proﬁling of the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome, Nature 418
(2002), no. 6896, 387–391.

11

[9] G. Giaever, P. Flaherty, J. Kumm, M. Proctor, C. Nislow, D.F. Jaramillo, A.M. Chu, M.I. Jordan,
identifying the functional interactions of
A.P. Arkin, and R.W. Davis, Chemogenomic proﬁling:
small molecules in yeast, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 101 (2004), no. 3, 793.

[10] M. Hamady, J.J. Walker, J.K. Harris, N.J. Gold, and R. Knight, Error-correcting barcoded primers

for pyrosequencing hundreds of samples in multiplex, Nature methods 5 (2008), no. 3, 235–237.

[11] T.X. Han, X.Y. Xu, M.J. Zhang, X. Peng, and L.L. Du, Method global ﬁtness proﬁling of ﬁssion

yeast deletion strains by barcode sequencing, (2010).

[12] P.D.N. Hebert, E.H. Penton, J.M. Burns, D.H. Janzen, and W. Hallwachs, Ten species in one: Dna
barcoding reveals cryptic species in the neotropical skipper butterﬂy astraptes fulgerator, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 (2004), no. 41, 14812.

[13] DM Lambert, A. Baker, L. Huynen, O. Haddrath, PDN Hebert, and CD Millar, Is a large-scale

dna-based inventory of ancient life possible?, Journal of Heredity 96 (2005), no. 3, 279–284.

[14] M. Margulies, M. Egholm, W.E. Altman, S. Attiya, J.S. Bader, L.A. Bemben, J. Berka, M.S. Braver-
man, Y.J. Chen, Z. Chen, et al., Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors,
Nature 437 (2005), no. 7057, 376–380.

[15] P. Parameswaran, R. Jalili, L. Tao, S. Shokralla, B. Gharizadeh, M. Ronaghi, and A.Z. Fire, A
pyrosequencing-tailored nucleotide barcode design unveils opportunities for large-scale sample multi-
plexing, Nucleic Acids Research 35 (2007), no. 19, e130.

[16] B. Scherens and A. Goﬀeau, The uses of genome-wide yeast mutant collections, Genome biology 5

(2004), no. 7, 229.

[17] K. Shiroguchi, T.Z. Jia, P.A. Sims, and X.S. Xie, Digital rna sequencing minimizes sequence-
dependent bias and ampliﬁcation noise with optimized single-molecule barcodes, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109 (2012), no. 4, 1347–1352.

[18] D.D. Shoemaker, D.A. Lashkari, D. Morris, M. Mittmann, and R.W. Davis, Quantitative pheno-
typic analysis of yeast deletion mutants using a highly parallel molecular bar–coding strategy, Nature
genetics 14 (1996), no. 4, 450–456.

[19] S. SHOKRALLA, J.L. SPALL, J.F. GIBSON, and M. HAJIBABAEI, Next-generation sequencing

technologies for environmental dna research, Molecular Ecology 21 (2012), no. 8, 1794–1805.

[20] A.M. Smith, L.E. Heisler, J. Mellor, F. Kaper, M.J. Thompson, M. Chee, F.P. Roth, G. Giaever,
and C. Nislow, Quantitative phenotyping via deep barcode sequencing, Genome research 19 (2009),
no. 10, 1836–1842.

[21] F. Van Nieuwerburgh, S. Soetaert, K. Podshivalova, E.A.L. Wang, L. Schaﬀer, D. Deforce, D.R.
Salomon, S.R. Head, and P. Ordoukhanian, Quantitative bias in illumina truseq and a novel post
ampliﬁcation barcoding strategy for multiplexed dna and small rna deep sequencing, PloS one 6 (2011),
no. 10, e26969.

[22] E.A. Winzeler, D.D. Shoemaker, A. Astromoﬀ, H. Liang, K. Anderson, B. Andre, R. Bangham,
R. Benito, J.D. Boeke, H. Bussey, et al., Functional characterization of the s. cerevisiae genome by
gene deletion and parallel analysis, Science 285 (1999), no. 5429, 901–906.

