0
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
4
1

 

 
 
]

.

N
G
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
7
2

.

2
0
0
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ARBITRAGE STRATEGY

CONSTANTINOS KARDARAS

Abstract. An arbitrage strategy allows a ﬁnancial agent to make certain proﬁt out of nothing,
i.e., out of zero initial investment. This has to be disallowed on economic basis if the market is
in equilibrium state, as opportunities for riskless proﬁt would result in an instantaneous movement
of prices of certain ﬁnancial instruments. The principle of not allowing for arbitrage opportunities
in ﬁnancial markets has far-reaching consequences, most notably the option-pricing and hedging
formulas in complete markets.

It is diﬃcult to imagine of a normative condition that is more widely-accepted and unquestionable
in the minds of anyone involved in the ﬁeld of Quantitative Finance other than the absence of
arbitrage opportunities in a ﬁnancial market. Put plainly, an arbitrage strategy allows a ﬁnancial
agent to make certain proﬁt out of nothing, i.e., out of zero initial investment. This has to be
disallowed on economic basis if the market is in equilibrium state, as opportunities for riskless
proﬁt would result in an instantaneous movement of prices of certain ﬁnancial instruments.

Let us give an illustrative example of an arbitrage strategy in the foreign exchange market,
commonly called the triangular arbitrage. Suppose that Kate, in London, is buying1 the U.S. dollar
for €0.685. Tom, in San Francisco, is buying Japanese yen for $0.009419. Finally, Toru, in Tokyo,
is buying one euro for U155.02. All these transactions are supposed to be able to occur at the
same time. There is something particular in the situation just-described — something that could
allow you to make riskless proﬁt. Let us see how. You borrow $10, 000 from your rich aunt Clara
and tell her you will return the money in a matter of minutes. First, you approach Mary and
change all your dollars to euros. This means that you will get €6, 850. With the euros in-hand,
you contact Toru and change them into yen — you will get U(6, 850 × 155.02) = U1, 061, 887.
Finally, you call Tom, wire him all your yen and change them back to dollars, which gets you
$(1, 061, 887 × 0.009419) ≡ $10, 001.91. You give the $10, 000 back to you aunt Clara as promised,
and you have managed to create $1.91 out of thin air.

Although the above example is over-simplistic,

it gives a clear idea of what arbitrage is: a
position on a combination of assets that requires zero initial capital and results in a proﬁt with no
risk involved. Let us now walk a step further and see what will happen under the situation of the
preceding example. As more and more investors become aware of the discrepancy between prices,
they will all try to use the same smart strategy that you used for their beneﬁt. Everyone will be
trying to exchange U.S. dollars for euros in the ﬁrst step of the arbitrage, which will drive Mary to
start buying U.S. dollar for less than €0.685, as a result of high demand for the euros she is selling.
Similarly, Tom will start buying Japanese yen for less than $0.009419 and Toru will be buying euro
for less than U155.02. Very soon, the situation will be such that nobody is able to make a riskless
proﬁt anymore.

The economic rationale behind asking for non-existence of arbitrage opportunities is exactly
based on the discussion of the previous paragraph. If arbitrage opportunities were present in the

1All the prices we are referring to in this example are bid prices of the currencies involved.

1

2

CONSTANTINOS KARDARAS

market, a multitude of investors would try to take advantage of them simultaneously. Therefore,
there would be an almost instantaneous move of the prices of certain ﬁnancial instruments as a
response to a supply-demand imbalance. This price movement will continue until there is no longer
any opportunity for riskless proﬁt available.

It is important to note that the above, somewhat theoretical, discussion does not imply that
arbitrage opportunities never exist in practice. On the contrary, it has been observed that oppor-
tunities for some, albeit usually minuscule, riskless proﬁt appear frequently as a consequence of the
huge amount of distant geographic trading locations, as well as a result of the numerous ﬁnancial
products that have sprung and are sometimes interrelated in complicated ways. Realizing that
such opportunities exist is a matter of rapid access to information that a certain group of investors,
so-called arbitrageurs2, has. It is rather the existence of arbitrageurs acting in ﬁnancial markets
that ensures that when arbitrage opportunities exist, they will be ﬂeeting.

The principle of not allowing for arbitrage opportunities in ﬁnancial markets has far-reaching
consequences and has immensely boosted research in Mathematical Finance. The ground-breaking
papers of F. Black and M. Scholes [1] and R. Merton [4], published at 19733, were the ﬁrst instances
explaining how absence of arbitrage opportunities leads to rational pricing and hedging formulas for
European-style options in a geometric Brownian motion ﬁnancial model. This idea was consequently
taken up and generalized by many authors, and has lead to a profound understanding of the interplay
between the economics of ﬁnancial markets and the mathematics of stochastic processes, reaching
deep results.

We close the discussion of arbitrages on a funny and light note. Such is the ﬁrm belief on the
principle of not allowing for arbitrage opportunities in ﬁnancial modeling, that even jokes have been
created in order to substantiate it further. We quote directly from Chapter 1 of [2], which can be
used as an excellent, though more mathematically advanced, introduction to arbitrage.

A professor working in Mathematical Finance and a normal4 person go on a walk
and the normal person sees a €100 bill lying on the street. When the normal person
wants to pick it up, the professor says: “Don’t try to do that.
It is absolutely
impossible that there is a €100 bill lying on the street. Indeed, if it were lying on
the street, somebody else would have picked it up before you”.

References

[1] F. Black and M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, The Journal of Political Economy,

81 (1973), pp. 637–654.

[2] F. Delbaen and W. Schachermayer, The mathematics of arbitrage, Springer Finance, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

2006.

[3] J. C. Hull, Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives (7th Edition), Prentice Hall, May 2008.
[4] R. C. Merton, Theory of Rational Option Pricing, Bell Journal of Economics, 4 (1973), pp. 141–183.

Constantinos Kardaras, Mathematics and Statistics Department, Boston University, 111 Cumming-

ton Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

E-mail address: kardaras@bu.edu

2See [3] for a classiﬁcation of investor types.
3For this work, the authors were awarded the Nobel prize in Economics in 1997.
4Is this bold distancing from normality of Mathematical Finance professors, clearly implied from the authors of
[2], a decisive step towards illuminating the perception they have of their own personalities? Or is it just a gimmick
used to add another humorous ingredient to the joke? The answer is left for the reader to determine.

