4
1
0
2

 
t
c
O
8
2

 

.

 
 
]
T
S
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

2
v
8
9
8
6

.

0
1
4
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Are news important to predict large losses?

M. Bernardia, L. Cataniab, L. Petrellaa,∗

aDepartment of Methods and Models for Economics, Territory and Finance, Sapienza

bDepartment of Economics and Finance, University of Rome Tor Vergata

University of Rome

Abstract

In this paper we investigate the impact of news to predict extreme ﬁnancial
returns using high frequency data. We consider several model speciﬁcations dif-
fering for the dynamic property of the underlying stochastic process as well as
for the innovation process. Since news are essentially qualitative measures, they
are ﬁrstly transformed into quantitative measures which are subsequently intro-
duced as exogenous regressors into the conditional volatility dynamics. Three
basic sentiment indexes are constructed starting from three list of words deﬁned
by historical market news response and by a discriminant analysis. Models
are evaluated in terms of their predictive accuracy to forecast out–of–sample
Value–at–Risk of the STOXX Europe 600 sectors at diﬀerent conﬁdence levels
using several statistic tests and the Model Conﬁdence Set procedure of Hansen
et al. (2011). Since the Hansen’s procedure usually delivers a set of models hav-
ing the same VaR predictive ability, we propose a new forecasting combination
technique that dynamically weights the VaR predictions obtained by the models
belonging to the optimal ﬁnal set. Our results conﬁrms that the inclusion of ex-
ogenous information as well as the right speciﬁcation of the returns’ conditional
distribution signiﬁcantly decrease the number of actual versus expected VaR
violations towards one, as this is especially true for higher conﬁdence levels.

Keywords: GARCH models, extreme loss, sentiment analysis, Model
Conﬁdence Set, Value–at–Risk forecast combination.

1. Introduction

The interaction between news and market volatility plays an important role in
risk management and asset pricing.
Indeed, there are no doubts that infor-
mation about individual institutions’ health conditions as well as the general
macroeconomic situation move investors decisions. As theorised by the eﬃcient
market hypothesis, a direct relation may exist between news arrival and the

∗Corresponding author, MEMOTEF Department, Sapienza University of Rome, Via del

Castro Laurenziano, 9, 00166 Rome, e-mail: lea.petrella@uniroma1.it

Preprint submitted to

September 17, 2018

conditional variance of observed stock returns. More precisely, looking at the
semi–strong form of the “Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis” (EMH) of Fama (1969),
stock prices adjust to publicly available news information very rapidly and in an
unbiased fashion. The “Mixture of Distribution Hypothesis” (MDH) of Clark
(1973) also points out a direct linkage between risk and information, arguing
that there exists a serially correlated mixing variable, measuring the rate at
which information arrives to the market, that drives the volatility of stock re-
turns. The enduring interest in return predictability using news information
reﬂects its enormous implications. For practitioners, predictable asset returns
can aﬀect the asset allocation and hedging decisions of investors and the tim-
ing of security issuances by ﬁrms. For academics, the existence of predictable
returns has implications for market eﬃciency and for how aggregate ﬂuctua-
tions in the economy are transmitted to and from ﬁnancial markets. Moreover,
recent advances in asset pricing theory and a huge empirical literature have pro-
vided a strong evidence that conditional variance of stock prices is predictable,
to some extent, using publicly available information. Numerous recent papers
provide evidence that the predictability results from business cycle movements
and changes in investors’ perceptions of risk that are reﬂected in time–varying
risk premiums. Others, however, provide evidence that predictability reﬂects
an ineﬃcient market populated with overreacting and irrational investors (see
e.g. Mitra and Mitra, 2010; Kalev et al., 2011; Chopra et al., 1992; De Bondt
and Thaler, 1985; Lehmann, 1990).

A related unstressed important question, which has not been deeply investi-
gated, is whether the inclusion of news as exogenous regressors helps to forecast
extreme returns frequently observed in ﬁnancial time series sampled at high fre-
quencies. This paper adopts this point of view and investigates the impact of
information to predict extreme ﬁnancial returns using high frequency data in an
extensive study conducted on nineteen sectors built from the STOXX Europe
600 constituents according to the “FactSet” classiﬁcation. By extreme ﬁnancial
returns we mean events that adversely aﬀect the value of investor’s assets or
portfolios, violating the Value–at–risk (VaR) measure at 1% conﬁdence level.
From a risk management point of view, more accurate VaR forecasts result in
several beneﬁts such as a better prediction of future losses and less capital to
hold for regulatory requirements as pointed out in Basel (1996). Moreover, since
the VaR forecast is often linked with the volatility prediction, it follows that also
derivative and asset pricing, can beneﬁt from more accurate VaR predictions.

To evaluate the relevance of the news information to predict the conditional
distribution of large returns, we include exogenous covariates into the speciﬁ-
cation of several dynamic volatility models diﬀering for the dynamic property
of the underlying stochastic process as well as for the innovation assumption.
Dynamic conditional volatility models have become one of the most popular risk
management tool for modelling the variability of stock returns. For our empir-
ical analysis we refer to the class of autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic
(ARCH) models introduced by Engle (1982). ARCH–type models of Engle
(1982) and Bollerslev (1986) oﬀer a simple and eﬀective method to empirically
investigate the relevance of including exogenous regressors accounting for the

2

news.

When dealing with information, a ﬁrst challenge is to ﬁnd an appropriate
proxy for the news process. The intrinsic qualitative nature of news implies the
necessity of a model which transforms this stream of information into quanti-
tative measures. Although seminal studies use volumes and quotes as proxies
for news (see e.g. Lamoureux and Lastrapes, 1990; Ito and Roley, 1986), many
researchers argues that these kind of proxies are biased and are not appropri-
ated, see e.g. Kalev et al. (2011). More recent studies (see Hafez 2009, which
refers to RavenPack’s technique) use alternative proxies which account also for
some measures of goodness or badness which are normally referred to “senti-
ment” indicators. For a comprehensive and up to date survey on news analytics
techniques, see Das (2011).

Througout this paper the empirical investigation is conduced using ﬁve re-
gressors: the lagged volumes, the number of words in news headlines referred
to speciﬁc companies and three basic sentiment indicators which accounts for
“good”, “bad”, and “high” number of volatility words in companies related news
headlines. Moreover, since high frequency data are necessary in order to link the
news to extreme ﬁnancial losses, we use ﬁve minutes data to build exogenous
regressors.

Several alternative models obtained by combining the conditional volatility
speciﬁcation, the diﬀerent exogenous regressors accounting for news, and the
diﬀerent error distribution assumption, are considered. Forecasted VaRs deliv-
ered by competing models are then backtested using several criteria. We use
the actual over expected exceedance ratio, the mean and the maximum absolute
deviations of violating return of McAleer and da Veiga (2008), the conditional
and unconditional coverage test of Christoﬀersen (1998) and Kupiec (1995), and
the dynamic quantile (DQ) test of Engle and Manganelli (2004). As pointed out
by Chen et al. (2012) these measures go beyond assessing violation rates and
allow risk management to incorporate loss magnitudes. Despite their recognised
relevance to compare VaR violations, those tests fail to discriminate alternative
models on the basis of the predictive accuracy of the VaRs. For model selection
purposes, we consider the Model Conﬁdence Set procedure (MCS) recently de-
veloped by Hansen (2003), Hansen and Lunde (2005), and Hansen et al. (2011)
adapted to the case where VaR forecasts’ performance have to be assessed. The
Hansen’s procedure consists of a sequence of statistic tests which permits to
construct a set of “superior” models (SSM), where the null hypothesis of equal
predictive ability (EPA) is not rejected. Since our goal is to obtain a SSM con-
sisting of models that are statistically equivalent to predict future VaR levels,
throughout the model selection procedure we propose to use a loss function ex-
plicitly tailored to penalise returns above and below the forecasted VaR in an
asymmetric way. The loss function has been previously used by Gonzales et al.
(2004) for for backtesting purposes.

The presence of several models with the same predictive power in terms of the
VaR forecasting, open the question of pooling the information contained in each
model forecast. Since the seminal works of Reid (1968, 1969) on forecast com-
binations, several motivations have been put forward to justify such technique.

3

Stock and Watson (1999, 2001, 2004), for example, found that combining fore-
casts usually produces better results than simpler model selection techniques.
Hoeting et al. (1999) deal with “model uncertainty” in a Bayesian framework
by averaging diﬀerent model speciﬁcations. Within a decision–theoretical ap-
proach, combining forecasts can be seen as a procedure aiming at diversifying
and then reducing the risk of selecting a single model to produce forecasts. The
recent surveys of Timmermann (2006) and Aiolﬁ et al. (2011) provide further
motivations for combining forecasts.

In this paper, we propose a dynamic procedure that combines VaR forecasts
delivered by the models belonging to the superior set. As argued by Giacomini
and Komunjer (2005), the combination for VaR models is beneﬁcial since the
VaR is a small coverage quantile model which is sensitive to the few observa-
tions below the quantile estimate. Moreover, combining diﬀerent VaR models
can also robustify individual VaR forecasts, since estimated model parameter
are particularly unstable over time. We propose to combine VaR predictions by
a dynamic weighting scheme using a new exponential smoothing moving average
process. The smoothing process we propose for the weights considers an asym-
metric innovation distribution accounting also for the parameter uncertainty
problem.

Our empirical results conﬁrm that the information news signiﬁcantly im-
proves the prediction of extreme values in an extensive out–of–sample analysis.
Moreover, we show that the combination of an “ad hoc” model selection pro-
cedure with an optimal dynamic VaR combination technique provides a better
VaR prediction. Finally, as additional consideration, we ﬁnd that the introduc-
tion of exogenous regressors explains the seasonal volatility patterns up to a
weekly period which characterise high frequency ﬁnancial data, see Gencay et
al. (2001).

The remaining of the paper is organised as follows.

In Section 2 we sys-
tematically review the empirical literature on the relevance of news to predict
ﬁnancial returns. Section 3 details the model speciﬁcations, while Section 4 de-
scribes the Hansen et al. (2011) model selection procedure. Section 5 describes
the dynamic VaR combination technique developed to pool VaR forecasts. Sec-
tion 6 describes the data, provides insights about the construction of exogenous
regressors, and discusses the main empirical results. Section 7 concludes.

2. Literature review

Since the seminal work of Clark (1973), which is normally referred to as the
Mixture of Distribution Hypothesis (MDH), a relevant number of research works
appeared in the ﬁnancial econometric literature focusing on the relationship be-
tween stock’s volatility and news, one of the major problem being the choice of
an adequate proxy for the news arrival process. The ﬁrst natural answer to this
relevant question was to use volumes and quotes (see e.g. Ito and Roley 1986
and Lamoureux and Lastrapes 1990). The recent work of Kalev et al. (2004)
argues that there are three main factors to be taken into account using trading
volumes as proxy for the informations: the endogenous nature of volumes, the

4

presence of diﬀerent kind of traders having diﬀerent news interpretations (for
example, noise trader versus liquidity trader), and the fact that volumes could
not account for private information. Another stream of literature in early 90’s
focused instead on news classiﬁcation. Jones et al. (1998), for example, used
scheduled versus unscheduled news in a EGARCH model ﬁnding signiﬁcative
results modelling the ﬁrst two moments of the USD/AUD exchange rate. Many
other studies instead model the impact of news in the conditional volatility
equation using speciﬁc dummy variables: Blasco et al. (2002) use four dum-
mies (respectively for a combination of good–bad news and high–low relevance
news) in a GJR–GARCH speciﬁcation showing that bad news could be used
to capture the asymmetric volatility response of negative shocks. The related
work of Kim (1998) uses similar proxies in a EGARCH model for the USD/AUD
exchange rate ﬁnding signiﬁcative results even for the conditional mean spec-
iﬁcation. In a multivariate framework, Fornari et al. (2002) used newspaper
headlines as exogenous variables in a Markov switching vector autoregressive
model with GARCH innovations. As a consequence of the technology innova-
tion and computer power improvement, the last decade has seen a rapid increase
of the number of works focusing on the use of publicly available information.
DeGennaro and Shrieves (1997) and Ederington and Lee (1993) use the num-
ber of macroeconomic news to explain foreign exchange conditional volatility,
a technique that in recent years is referred to the naive classiﬁcation (see also
Das (?), for an extensive survey on news analytics technique). The use of more
sophisticated news analytic technique, gives rise to the big challenge of moving
from text to context. In other words, this means that it is really diﬃcult to
quantify the message behind new headline stamps. The common approach is
to create an index accounting for some news measures. This index could be a
simple news–related words counter or a more sophisticated sentiment index (see
Hafez 2009, which refers to RavenPack’s technique). Kalev and Duong (2011)
and Kalev et al. (2004) use an EGARCH model where the number of news
enters the conditional volatility equations as exogenous regressor, to explain in-
tradaily volatility patterns of the S&P/ASX 200 Index. They ﬁnd that the rate
of information arrivals has a positive impact on volatility. Mitchell and Harold
(1994) provide similar results using a weekly timeframe, while Berry and Howe
(1994) do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant relation between number of news releases by
Reuter’s News Service and the S&P500 index volatility.

In this paper, we approach the problem of quantifying the impact of news in-
formation from the diﬀerent point of view of measuring extreme ﬁnancial losses.
To this end, we employ the word counter approach, i.e. the sentiment indexes
are function of the number of speciﬁc words class, using a new information
supplier (the FactSet workstation), and the new classiﬁcation of “high” words
associated with the the well know “good, bad” scheme.

3. Model speciﬁcations

As detailed in the Introduction,
in this paper we investigate and compare
VaR forecasts obtained using a list of popular autoregressive conditional het-

5

eroskedastic (ARCH) models introduced by Engle (1982) and subsequently gen-
eralised to the GARCH family by Bollerslev (1986). In order to account for the
well known stylised facts about ﬁnancial returns we consider several speciﬁca-
tions diﬀering for the conditional volatility dynamics as well as the distributions
of the error term. Furthermore, a ﬁrst–order autoregressive term is included into
the conditional mean speciﬁcation of all the competing models to capture the
negative ﬁrst order autocorrelation frequently displayed by high frequency data,
as documented by Gencay et al. (2001) among others.

Formally, let rt the logarithmic return at time t, for t = 1, 2, . . . , T , we

consider the following general model speciﬁcation

rt = µ + φrt−1 + εt,

εt = σtζt,

ζt ∼ D (0, 1) ,

where ζt is a sequence of independently and identically distributed random
variables with general distribution D (0, 1) having mean zero and variance 1, σt
is the conditional standard deviation of rt and φ is the autoregressive parameter
assumed to be |φ| < 1 to preserve stationarity. Regarding the speciﬁcation of the
error distribution D (0, 1), we consider the usual thin–tailed Gaussian N (0, 1)
assumption and the two alternatives, i.e.
degrees of freedom and the Generalised Error distribution (GED), being able
to reproduce the high level of kurtosis frequently observed empirically. The
standardised GED, i.e. GE (0, 1, ν) has conditional density given by

the Student–t Tν(cid:0)0, ν−2

ν (cid:1), with ν

f (0, 1, ν) =

ν exp(cid:26)− 1
q22/ν Γ(ν−1)

2(cid:16)q22/ν Γ(ν−1)

Γ(3ν−1) |ǫt|(cid:17)ν(cid:27)

Γ(3ν−1) 21+ν−1Γ(ν−1)

1(−∞,∞) (ǫt) ,

(1)

where the shape parameter ν ∈ (0, ∞) regulates the tail behaviour: ν = 2
corresponds to the Gaussian density while ν = 1 correspond to the Laplace
distribution of Kotz et al. (2001).

We complete the model speciﬁcations by introducing a dynamics for the con-
ditional volatility term σ2
t belonging to the family of GARCH models. ARCH–
type models are ﬂexible and powerful tools for conditional volatility modelling;
they are able to consider the volatility clustering phenomena, the excess of
kurtosis and the asymmetry of the data. Moreover, they permit to introduce
exogenous information in the speciﬁcation of the conditional volatility dynamics
in an eﬃcient and eﬀective way. The simplest conditional volatility dynamics
we consider as a benchmark is the GARCH(1,1) speciﬁcation introduced by
Bollerslev (1986)

t = ω + δT
σ2

xt + αε2

t−1 + βσ2

t−1,

(2)

where ω > 0 and 0 ≤ α, β < 1 with α + β < 1 to preserve weak ergodic
stationarity of the conditional variance. To account for asymmetric response
(leverage eﬀect, see Black 1976) we also consider two additional speciﬁcations,
i.e. the EGARCH(1,1) of Nelson (1991)

log(cid:0)σ2

t(cid:1) = ω + δTxt + g (ζt−1) + β log(cid:0)σ2

t−1(cid:1) ,

(3)

6

where g (ζt) = αζt + γ (|ζt| − E|ζt|), and the GJR-GARCH(1,1) of Glosten et al.
(1993)

t−1 + γ 1(−∞,0] (εt−1) ε2

(4)

t−1(cid:1) + βσ2

t−1,

σ2

t = ω + δTxt +(cid:0)αε2

where ω > 0, 0 ≤ α, β, γ < 1 with α + β + γP (ζt < 0) < 1, P (ζt < 0) represents
the probability to observe a negative event under the chosen distribution for ζt,
and 1(a,b) (x) denotes the indicator function having non–zero values for x in the
interval (a, b). In all the considered volatility speciﬁcations, xt denotes a vector
of exogenous variables at time t, which measures the impact of news on the
conditional volatility process, and δ denotes the associated regression parameter.
Details on the procedure used to build exogenous quantitative regressors from
recorded ﬁnancial and macroeconomics news are provided in Section 6. To
estimate model parameters we consider the maximum likelihood approach, see
e.g. Francq and Zakoian (2010).

4. Model selection procedure

The availability of several alternative model speciﬁcations being able to ad-
equately describe the unobserved data generating process (DGP) opens the
question of selecting the “best ﬁtting model” according to a given optimality
criterion. The deﬁnition of the optimality criterion requires the prior speciﬁca-
tion of a target with respect to which the ability of each model to replicate that
characteristic is evaluated. Since in this paper we are interested in comparing
several model speciﬁcations on the basis of their predictive ability of large losses,
a natural candidate would be the A/E violation rate or the usual conditional
and unconditional coverage tests combined with a selection procedure. Despite
their recognised relevance to compare VaR violations, those tests fail to discrim-
inate alternative model speciﬁcations on the basis of the predictive accuracy of
the VaRs. To overcome this problem and to present results less sensitive to the
low number of theoretical violations, we apply the Model Conﬁdence Set (MCS)
procedure recently developed by Hansen et al. (2011). The Hansen’s procedure
consists of a sequence of statistic tests which permits to build the “Superior Set
of Models” (SSM), where the null hypothesis of equal predictive ability (EPA)
is not rejected at a certain conﬁdence level. The EPA statistic tests requires the
speciﬁcation of a loss function summarising the ﬁnal target of the comparison
procedure. According to the target of predicting extreme losses, we propose
to use as loss function the asymmetric VaR function of Gonzales et al. (2004)
which penalises for each model j = 1, 2, . . . , m more heavily observations below
the τ –th quantile level, i.e. rt+1 < VaRτ
j,t+1|t than observation above it, where
VaRτ
j,t+1|t denotes the τ –level predicted VaR. In our contest, the loss function
for model j becomes

ℓ(cid:16)rt+1, VaRτ

j,t+1|t(cid:17) = n−1ρτ(cid:16)rt+1 − VaRτ

j,t+1|t(cid:17) ,

(5)

where ρτ (z) = z(cid:0)τ − 1(−∞,0) (z)(cid:1), is the τ –th quantile loss function and T is

the length of the out of sample rolling forecast.

7

We now brieﬂy describe how the MCS procedure is implemented. The pro-
cedure starts from an initial set of models M0 of dimension m encompassing
all the model speciﬁcations described in Section 3, and results in a hopefully
smaller set of ˆM∗
1−α of dimension m∗ ≤ m for a given conﬁdence level 1 − α.
The best scenario, of course, would be when the ﬁnal set consists of a single
mode, i.e. m∗ = 1.

Formally, let dij,t+1 denotes the loss diﬀerence between models i and j, at

time t + 1

dij,t+1 = ℓ(cid:16)rt+1, VaRτ

i,t+1|t(cid:17) − ℓ(cid:16)rt+1, VaRτ

j,t+1|t(cid:17) ,

(6)

for i, j = 1, . . . , m, and t = 0, . . . , n − 1, under stationarity assumptions for the
dij series, the null hypothesis, for a given set of model is

H0 : E (dij ) = 0,

∀i, j = 1, 2, . . . , m

tested versus the alternative hypothesis

H1 : E (dij) 6= 0,

for some

i, j = 1, . . . , m.

The appropriate test statistic is

(7)

(8)

(9)

TR = max
i,j∈M

| ¯dij |

q ˆvar(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) ,

deﬁned in Hansen et al.

(2011), where, ¯dij = n−1Pn

relative sample loss between the i–th and j–th models, while ˆvar(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) is a boot-
strapped estimate of var(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1). According to Hansen (2011), the bootstrapped
variances ˆvar(cid:0) ¯di,·(cid:1), are calculated performing a block–bootstrap procedure de-

tailed in Appendix A of this paper. The block length p is chosen as the max-
imum number of signiﬁcants autoregressive parameters resulting after ﬁtting a
stationary AR(p) process on all the dij series.

t=1 dij,t measures the

The MCS procedure sequentially eliminates the worst model until the null
hypothesis of EPA is accepted for each model in the set, the elimination rule
coherent with (9) is

eR = arg max

i

sup

j

.

(10)

Since the SSM ˆM∗
1−α delivered by the Hanen’s procedure usually contains a large
number of models characterised by the same VaR predictive ability, in the next
section, we describe how to implement a procedure that combines the obtained
VaRs forecast.




¯dijq ˆvar(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1)




8

5. Combining VaRs

1−α, for which all the forecasted VaRs, VaRτ

In general the SSM procedure detailed in the previous section delivers, for a
given conﬁdence level α, a set of models with superior predictive ability i.e.
ˆM∗
j,t+1|t, ∀t = 1, 2, . . . , T and
∀j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗are available. The presence of several models with the same
VaR predictive ability, open the question of pooling the information contained in
each model forecast. The theory of combining forecasts dates back to the work
of Bates and Granger (1969) and Reid (1968, 1969) that inspired subsequent
theoretical and empirical investigations on this topic. From the empirical point
of view, Stock and Watson (1999, 2001, 2004) ﬁnd that combining forecasts
usually produces better results than a simpler model selection procedure that
considers only the “best” model to produce forecast. Several motivations had
been put forward to justify such empirical evidence. The main justiﬁcation relies
upon the consideration that each alternative model speciﬁcation provides only
a “local approximation” of the true unknown DGP without over performing all
the outstanding ones, uniformly over the period of time where the competing
models are evaluated. From a Bayesian perspective, the pioneer work of Hoeting
et al. (1999) support the idea of dealing with “model uncertainty” by averaging
diﬀerent model speciﬁcations. Furthermore, within a decision–theoretical ap-
proach, combining forecasts can be seen as a procedure that aims to diversify
and then reduce the “model selection” risk. The works of Timmermann (2006)
and Aiolﬁ et al.
(2011) provide excellent surveys of recent developments on
forecast combination.

In this work we instead consider the related topic of combining VaR forecasts
at the same conﬁdence level τ . As argued by Giacomini and Komunjer (2005),
the combination for VaR models is beneﬁcial since the VaR is a small coverage
quantile which is sensitive to the few observations below the quantile estimate.
Within the general framework of conditional quantile estimate, Christoﬀersen
et al. (1999) provide some motivations for combining VaRs in order to obtain a
single statistically superior measure but they do not give any method to select
the weights associated to each model. Giacomini and Komunjer (2005) instead
construct an encompassing test to compare conditional quantile forecasts ob-
tained from non–nested models in an out–of–sample framework. However, their
work relies on a simple “tick” loss function which does not penalise more heavily
observations far from the estimated quantile. Here instead we ﬁrst determine
the SSM using the MCS procedure of Hansen et al. (2011) based on an “ad
hoc” loss function explicitly tailored to discriminate quantile–based risk mea-
sures, and then we dynamically weight the VaR predictions to produce better
VaR forecasts at each point in time. The proposed dynamic VaR combination
method can be seen as a method to optimally choose the model weights which
also accommodates parameter uncertainty problem. Moreover, since estimated
model parameters are particularly unstable over time, combining diﬀerent VaR
models can robustify individual VaR forecasts.

In particular, we propose to pool the information coming from the individ-
j,t+1|t, j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗ estimates considering the following convex linear

ual VaRτ

9

combination

VaRτ,dyn

t+1|t =

m∗Xj=1

̟j,t+1|tVaRτ

j,t+1|t,

(11)

where ̟j,t+1|t, for j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗ is a set of model speciﬁc weights. In principle
the weights ̟j,t+1|t, for j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗ can be chosen by some optimality
criterion based on the past history of the VaR violations. We propose to use
the following exponential smoothing moving average process

̟t+1,j = κj̟t,j + (1 − κj) ˜π(cid:16)rt, VaRτ

j,t|t−1, ˆσj,t(cid:17) ,

with κj ∈ (0, 1), and ˜π(cid:16)rt, VaRτ

j,t|t−1, ˆσj,t(cid:17) is the exponential of the τ –quantile

loss kernel deﬁned in equation (5) normalised over all the possible models be-
longing to the ﬁnal set M∗

1−α, i.e.

(12)

(13)

˜π(cid:16)rt, VaRτ

j,t|t−1, ˆσj,t(cid:17) =

expnℓ(cid:16)rt, VaRτ
expnℓ(cid:16)rt, VaRτ
Pm∗

j,t|t−1(cid:17) /ˆσj,to
j,t|t−1(cid:17) /ˆσj,to ,

j

where ˆσj,t, is the predicted conditional variance at time t of model j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗.
Equation (13) coincides with the relative loss of model j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗ with re-
spect to the weighted average loss of the VaR combinations and it guarantees
an asymmetric penalisation of returns above and below the forecasted VaRs ac-
counting also for the magnitude of VaR violations. Moreover, it can be shown
that equation (13) satisﬁes some optimality criteria because it is robust against
model misspeciﬁcations, i.e. it minimizes the Kullback–Leibler divergence with
respect to the probability density function having generated the observed data,
see Sriram et al. (2013).

The initial weighs at time t = 1 are set to ̟1,j = 1

which guarantees that Pm∗
t+1|t ∈(cid:16)minjnVaRτ

m∗ , for all j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗
j=1 ̟t,j = 1 for all t = 2, 3, . . . , T . In this way, the
convex linear combination (12) enforces the resulting VaR (11) to belong to
the interval deﬁned by the minimum and the maximum of estimated VaRs, i.e.
VaRτ,dyn
1−α.
Finally, we estimate the autoregressive parameters κj for j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗ by
minimising the average asymmetric VaR loss function of Gonzales et al. (2004)
over the forecast horizon.

j,t+1|to(cid:17), in the optimal set ˆM∗

j,t+1|to , maxjnVaRτ

6. Empirical Analysis

In this section we describe how we empirically investigate the impact of the news
regressors to predict large losses. In particular, we describe the procedure used
to build the exogenous regressors accounting for the news arrival process. Then,
we present the results concerning the application of the Hanen’s MCS procedure
highlighting the ability of the procedure to discriminate the diﬀerent model
speciﬁcations. We also discuss the results obtained using the VaR combination
technique proposed in the previous section.

10

6.1. The Data

Our dataset is made by all the STOXX Europe 600 constituents 1–minute prices
and volumes from 17/08/2012 09:00:00 to 01/02/2013 09:40:00 comprising of
87120 observations per ﬁrm, recorded from the Bloomberg workstation. Starting
from the 1–minute series, we construct two series at 2 and 5–minutes frequency
for prices and volumes, where volumes’ aggregation is made by sum. Then,
we cross–sectionally aggregate individual return series into nineteen sectors ac-
cording with the “FactSet” classiﬁcation. Aggregation is done by averaging
log–returns and by summing volumes, excluding 30 series which present miss-
ing values. The 2–minutes original dataset are used to preliminary investigate
on market news response, as discussed in the following Section 6.2, while the
5–minutes sectorial log–returns are used to build the model and to investigate
the ability of the diﬀerent models to predict large losses.

The descriptive statistics for the log–returns are provided in Table B.2 for
all the considered sectors. In line with stylised facts of ﬁnancial time series, the
returns are skewed and leptokurtic, indicating that their unconditional distri-
bution is not Normal as documented by the Jarque–Bera (JB) statistics.

The news information we consider come from the “FactSet” news archive
which collects news from about 35 diﬀerent agencies. From this database we
record 81425 company related and time stamped headlines excluding duplicated
ones. The headlines we consider contain various type of news: these are macroe-
conomics and institution speciﬁc, scheduled (such as earnings report, conference
call, central banks or politics announcement) and unscheduled. The collected
headlines are then cleaned from not relevant news, such as, for example, own-
ership update and conference calendar announces. At the end of this procedure
we remain with 51266 headlines. The exogenous regressor building procedure is
detailed in the next section.

6.2. Exogenous Regressors and model speciﬁcations

The analysis of the relevance of information to predict large losses starts by
constructing a dictionary of “relevant volatility words”, which is subsequently
used to deliver sentiment indicators for each sector we analyse. Sentiment in-
dicators are then included as exogenous regressors in the models speciﬁed in
Section 3. To this end, the 2–minutes dataset is divided into two equal parts:
the ﬁrst part is used to build the dictionary while the second one is used to
perform the out–of–sample analysis. By “relevant volatility words”, we mean
those words belonging to three diﬀerent sentiment categories named: “Positive”,
“Negative” and “High”. In particular, accordingly to our taxonomy, “Positive”,
or “Negative” volatility words are those that generate positive or negative mar-
ket reactions, respectively. Those words generating high volatility reactions are
instead classiﬁed as “High”.

The dictionary building up procedure consists of two main steps. The ﬁrst
step classiﬁes each in–sample headline into three diﬀerent categories: “Positive”,
“Negative” or “High”. According to Koppel and Shtrimberg (2004) procedure,
we search for which response the market had consequently to the headlines

11

publishing. Headlines that are followed by a strong positive or negative market
movement are classiﬁed as “Positive” or “Negative” news respectively, and those
involving subsequently large squared log–returns are classiﬁed as “High”. The
evaluation of the market response is based on a two–minutes time frame instead
of daily returns as suggested by Koppel and Shtrimberg (2004). We decide to in-
vestigate the market news reaction using the successive two minute log–returns
because, as described in the Introduction, the semi strong form of the EMH
states that stock prices will adjust to publicly available new information very
rapidly. While it is possible that ﬁnancial markets are not aligned with the semi
strong form of the EMH, the high number of spikes frequently observed by high
frequency ﬁnancial returns, suggests to use a short time frame. Regarding the
choice of two minutes time span, we observe that the two–minutes return series
have more accentuate spikes compared with the one, three and four minutes
series.

Formally, we associate the two minutes log–return rt prior to the headline
stamp, of the corresponding asset, to each in–sample headline lj, for all j =
1, 2, . . . , nh, where nh is the number of the in–sample headlines. Then, for given
threshold levels, ¯rneg, ¯rpos, ¯rhigh, we associate the two classes S={“Positive”,
“Negative”, “Neutral”}, and Q={“High”, “Low”} to each headline lj for j =
1, 2, . . . , nh, according to the following rules:

- lj,S =“Negative”, if rj ∈ (−∞, ¯rneg], “Positive”, if rj ∈ [¯rpos, ∞), “Neu-

tral”, if rj ∈ (¯rneg, ¯rpos),

- lj,Q =“High”, if r2

j ∈ [¯rhigh, ∞) and “Low”, if r2

j ∈ [0, ¯rhigh).

Threshold levels ¯rpos, ¯rneg and ¯rhigh, are deﬁned as the quantiles of the uncondi-
tional return distribution, i.e. P (rt < ¯rneg) = 0.025, P (rt > ¯rpos) = 0.025, and

P(cid:0)r2

t < ¯rhigh(cid:1) = 0.025.

The second part of the regressor building procedure consists in categorising
each word belonging to the news archive of 51266 headlines collected by FactSet
for the in–sample period. As for the headlines classiﬁcation, we ﬁrst look for
“Positive” and “Negative” volatility words, and then we search for “High” and
“Low” volatility words. A preliminary classiﬁcation was made by applying to
each word the most frequent class of the headlines it belongs to. Formally, we
assign to each word w in every headline lj, j = 1, 2, . . . , nh the modality of S and
Q associated to the headlines in which each word ω appears most frequently.
According to Das (?), in order to remain with only signiﬁcant words, each word
is subsequently scored using the Fisher discriminant statistic. Let i be a class
of the two categories S={“Positive”, “Negative”, “Neutral”}, and Q={“High”,
“Low”}, and let µi be the average number of times the word w appears in an
headline of category i and let mi,j be the number of times the word w appears
in a message j of category i, then the Fisher discriminant statistic is deﬁned as

F (w) =

(1/3)Pi6=k (µi − µk)2

(cid:16)PiPj (mi,j − µj)2(cid:17) / (Pi ni)

,

12

(14)

for any word w previously categorised. The Fisher discriminant statistic delivers
a score for each word which accounts for the level of category aﬃliation and we
keep words with an acceptable level of F (w). At the end of this procedure we
classiﬁed 259 words as “Good”, 239 as “Bad” and 366 as “High”. We remark
that words which are “Good”, or “Bad” could also be “High” but words that
are “High” are not necessary “Good” or “Bad”.

Based on the previous word classiﬁcation, we built the following three re-
gressors: “POS”, “NEG” and “HIGH”, measuring changes in the market sen-
timent. Each of the three regressors represents the number of words, of each
categories, which appears in the interval (t − 1, t]. It follows that, the inclu-
sion of these regressors in the conditional variance dynamic allows it to change
according to the new sentiment information coming from the news. We also
considered two additional covariates: “LAGVOL” representing the lagged vol-
umes and “NUMB” representing the total number of words in the interval
(t − 1, t]. While “POS”, “NEG” and “HIGH” are proxies for the market senti-
ment, “NUMB” and “LAGVOL” are a proxies for the information volume. The
regressor “NUMB” simply considers the total number of words as a proxy for
the information arrival. It should be noticed that it does not coincide with the
sum of the regressors “POS”, “NEG” and “HIGH” because even not categorised
words are considered in the total number of words. The regressor “NUMB” ac-
counts also for the news activism of a speciﬁc institution or sector.
Indeed,
it does not give any information about the nature of the news, but instead it
simply considers the market interest into a speciﬁc institution or sector. The
regressor “LAGVOL” instead is simply the aggregated lagged volumes at time
t and accounts for the market activism. In particular, it represents a measure
of investors’ interest into a speciﬁc institution or sector. Lagged volumes are
also used in Kalev and Duong (2004). In order to use these regressors into the
conditional volatility dynamics, the regressors’ timestamp must be aligned with
the 5–minute log–returns series. It follows that each regressor “POS”, “NEG”,
“HIGH”, “NUMB and “LAGVOL”, at time t should account for the informa-
tion arrival in the interval (t − 1, t] that generated the log–return a time t, rt.
For all the considered distribution errors and volatility speciﬁcations, we build
the MIV (Information Volumes) model which includes the variables “NUMB”
and “LAGVOL” , and the MSE (sentiment) model, which includes “POS” ,
“NEG” and “HIGH”covariates. The MIV speciﬁcation represents the volume of
the information ﬂow, and can be considered as a measure of the investor inter-
est in the institution or sector. Moreover, MIV is a good candidate to improve
the prediction of large market movements. The MSE speciﬁcation instead is a
measure of sentiment and is useful to account for diﬀerent market reactions to
diﬀerent kind of news. These two speciﬁcations are compared with the naive
model MN which does not consider any exogenous information.

Tables B.3 and B.4 report descriptive statistics for all the built regressors.
The high level of kurtosis in the regressors’ series (see for example the regressor
“NUMB” in Table B.3) could be linked with the high level of kurtosis usually
reported by ﬁnancial time series. In fact, according with the MDH hypothesis
of Clark (1973), the variance of returns is a function of the rate of information

13

ﬂow. More interesting, regressors exhibit even high level of autocorrelation, es-
pecially at lag 95 which coincides with one trading day at 5–minutes frequency.
This phenomenon is probably due to the open–market imputation of overnight
news. Indeed, in a high frequency timeframe, the news process has quite similar
seasonal patterns as that of the volatility process: see e.g. Gencay et al. (2001)
and Kalev e.al (2011) for a more comprehensive discussion.

6.3. Empirical results
In this section we discuss the results obtained by ﬁtting the models to our
dataset consisting of the 19 sectors of the STOXX Europe 600 index. For each
sector, the models belonging to the initial set M0 obtained by combining the
diﬀerent volatility dynamics, the distributions for the error term and the covari-
ates speciﬁcations discussed in Section 6.2, are compared.

A simple method to compare VaR forecasts is the actual versus expected
rate (A/E), deﬁned as the ratio between the realised VaR exceedances over a
given time horizon and their “a priori” expected values. Table B.5 reports the
A/E ratio for all the ecompassing models at two VaR conﬁdence levels τ = 1%
and τ = 0.1%. Table B.5 shows that high levels of A/E for τ = 0.1% are usually
associated to the Gaussian speciﬁcation, reﬂecting its inadequacy to capture
large price movements. Conversely, for the Student–t error distribution we ob-
serve levels of A/E closer to one. Moreover, for both the quantile conﬁdence
levels τ = (1%, 0.1%), models accounting for the information volume (MIV) or
the market sentiment (MSE) report value of the A/E ratio closer to one. A
more deeper inspection reveals that, for τ = 1% the MN model outperforms
others only in 3 cases, while accounting for information volumes improves the
VaR forecast ability in 12 cases. Moreover, as reported in Table B.5, even for
τ = 0.1% the naive model MN outperforms the speciﬁcations which include
covariates in only two cases, while MIV and MSE report more accurate A/E
levels 15 times over 19.

The magnitude of violating returns (AD) is also important, since it pro-
vides a measure of the expected loss given a VaR violation. Table B.6 reports
the maximum AD of violating returns, as considered by McAleer and da Veiga
(2008). We can see that, for all the considered sectors, the MIV and MSE
speciﬁcations exhibit lower maximum AD values with respect to the naive spec-
iﬁcation MN. This means that accounting for information helps to reduce the
maximum AD loss at both high (τ = 1%) and extreme (τ = 0.1%) conﬁdence
levels. More interesting is to note how this result would be independent to the
choice of the volatility dynamics or the error distribution speciﬁcation. From a
not reported analysis we found that the inclusion of the information ﬂow also
improves the general goodness–of–ﬁt, according to both the AIC and BIC in-
formation criteria (those results are available upon request). For each of the six
combinations of the GARCH–dynamics and the error distribution, the MIV and
MSE speciﬁcations report lower levels of AIC and BIC. Moreover, the ACF of
the standardised absolute residuals of the models MIV and MSE shows that the
daily seasonal patterns are signiﬁcantly reduced compared with the model MN.
Once again accounting for the information ﬂow helps to explain the volatility

14

patterns which usually aﬀects the high frequency ﬁnancial time series.

Tables B.7, B.8 and B.9 instead report the unconditional coverage (UC) test
of Kupiec (1995), the conditional coverage (CC) test of Christoﬀersen (1998)
and the dynamic quantile (DQ) test of Engle and Manganelli (2004), at the 5%
conﬁdence level. The inclusion of news information does not report any discrim-
inant result at the conﬁdence level τ = 1%. Conversely, the results reported in
tables B.7, B.8 and B.9 for the extreme VaR conﬁdence level τ = 0.1% conﬁrm
that the choice of a heavy tailed distribution for the error term, is strongly dis-
criminant. Furthermore, for τ = 0.1%, the rejection of the null hypothesis of
both tests is more frequent for the naive speciﬁcation MN.

From an unreported in–the–sample parameter estimation analysis (available
to the authors upon request) we found that for some sectors, the parameters
associated to the conditional mean dynamic appear to be not statistically sig-
niﬁcant. This essentially means that for those series the well know stylised fact
of negative serial autocorrelation frequently displayed by high frequency data
is not present. As described by Gencay et al. (2001), this phenomenon can
be associated to the procedure employed to construct the high frequency se-
ries. In addiction, our results showed that some parameters associated with the
exogenous regressors appear to be not statistically signiﬁcant which does not
represent a problem for this study since our focus is on extreme loss prediction
and not on describing the whole returns behaviour.

Concerning the speciﬁcation of the error distribution, we also test for the
presence of asymmetry by estimating the Skew–GARCH speciﬁcations already
introduced by De Luca and Loperﬁdo (2004). In particular, we considered the
skewing mechanism of Fernandez and Steel (1998) which guarantees a regular
behaviour of the likelihood function. The estimated shape parameters are equal
to one for all the considered sectors, indicating that the skewed distributions
collapse to the symmetric counterparts.

In next section we report results for the Model Conﬁdence Set procedure.

6.4. Application of the MCS procedure
In this section we discuss the results we obtained applying the MCS procedure
of Hansen (2003) and Hansen et al. (2011). In Table B.1 we report, for each
sector and each covariate speciﬁcation, the number of models belonging to the
SSM at the end of the MCS procedure, i.e. ˆM∗
1−α. Clearly, a small ﬁnal set of
models means that the procedure has been highly discriminant, i.e. models that
performs poorly were eliminated. Conversely, a large ﬁnal set of models means
that there were not statistical evidence of diﬀerent performances among the
competing models. As shown in Table B.1 the MCS procedure reports highly
discriminant results for most of the sectors and for both the VaR conﬁdence
levels τ = (1%, 0.1%). Comparing the results for the two conﬁdence levels we
observe that the ﬁnal set contains only 7 occurrences for τ = 0.1%, while even
16 for τ = 1%. This means that, using the MCS procedure, the set of models
that adequately predicts extreme VaR levels, such those implied by a conﬁdence
level of 0.1% is lower than that predict higher conﬁdence levels VaR. This result
is in line with the idea that only few models are able to predict large losses.

15

Moreover, it is clear from table B.1 that, performing the MCS procedure, the
model that most appears in the ﬁnal set ˆM∗
1−α is MIV. This means that adding
information volume proxies in the volatility dynamics, improve models ability
to predict large losses.

Table B.10 reports, for each covariate speciﬁcation, the Actual over Expected
(A/E) exceedance ratio and the maximum AD violating returns averaged across
the models belonging to the optimal ﬁnal set ˆM∗
1−α delivered by the MCS pro-
cedure. We observe that, for those cases where the MCS procedure does not
discriminate models, the average A/E ratio reports inconclusive results, while
the averaged maximum AD violating loss shows that the speciﬁcation MIV is
preferred for most of the considered sectors. Finally, we observe that the spec-
iﬁcation MIV corresponds always to the best performing model under the AD
metric for all the considered sectors.

6.5. VaR combination results
The main aim of the VaR combination technique introduced in Section 5 is to
provide a practical tool that combines VaR forecasts at a given quantile level
τ delivered by diﬀerent models. The MCS procedure ensures the availability
of a set of model having the same ability to predict the VaR at the desired
quantile level, under the chosen loss function. The VaR forecast delivered by
those models can subsequently be used as the main ingredients of the VaR
combination technique previously detailed.

In order to test the beneﬁts of using the proposed technique and the MCS
procedure we report a simple comparison using two diﬀerent VaR forecasts
combinations. The ﬁrst VaR forecast simply averages the individual VaRs across
the models belonging to the MCS

VaRτ,avg

t+1|t =

1
m∗

m∗Xj=1

VaRτ

j,t+1|t,

(15)

for t = 1, 2, . . . , T . The second model VaR forecast results by applying the
VaR combination technique proposed in equations (11) and (12). Table B.11,
reports the mean and the maximum AD for the two forecasting combination
methods and the two VaR conﬁdence levels τ = (1%, 0.1%). Inspecting Table
B.11 it is possible to see the beneﬁt of using the MCS procedure along with the
proposed VaR combination technique instead of simply averaging the available
models. For all the considered sectors and for both the conﬁdence levels, the
dynamic VaR combination approach VaRτ,dyn
t+1|t reports values of the max AD
being almost the 50% lower than those reported by the simple VaR average
VaRτ,dyn
t+1|t . This suggests that the proposed VaR combination technique helps
in reducing the large and extreme absolute deviations of VaR violating returns.
Looking at columns 6 to 9 of Table B.11 it is possible to note that the proposed
technique helps also in reducing the mean AD of VaR violating returns which
is particularly relevant from a risk management point of view, since reducing
the mean AD corresponds to a lower expected loss when a VaR violation oc-
curs. In Figures C.1 and C.2 we report an illustrative comparison between the

16

VaRs delivered by individual model VaRτ
forecast obtained by the static average VaRτ,avg
VaRτ,din

j,t+1|t, for j = 1, 2, . . . , m∗, the VaR
t+1|t and the dynamic VaR forecasts

t+1|t series.
As previously detailed, the VaR combination technique provides a dynamic
linear convex combination of the available VaR series; this is showed by Fig-
ure C.1 and C.2, where several VaR forecast series along with the VaRτ,avg
t+1|t
(grey dotted line) and the VaRτ,dyn
t+1|t (red dotted line) are reported. Since the
autoregressive parameters of the dynamic VaR combination are estimated by
minimizing the asymmetric loss function of Gonzalez–Riviera et al. (2004), it
follows that the resulting combined VaR series is more robust against outliers
than the static VaRτ,avg
t+1|t series. We note for example that models which are
highly non linear and strongly sensitive to outliers, such as the EGARCH (thin
blue line, in Figure C.1), sometimes results in wrong VaR predictions. How-
ever, since they can be useful to describe others complex ﬁnancial dynamics
of the conditional variance process it is important to use them in the dynamic
VaR averaging. Our proposed VaR combination technique results therefore in a
practical tool to account for several models preventing the outlier consequences
on VaR forecasts. Moreover, Figure C.2 compares the static VaR combination
(grey dotted line) with those obtained by using our dynamic technique in the
cases where all the models belonging to the initial set M0 (red dotted line) or
only the model belonging to the MCS ﬁnal set M∗
1−α (dark dotted line) are con-
sidered. Figure C.2 reveals that the dynamic method combined with the MCS
procedure (dark dotted line) provides more conservative VaR estimate especially
in presence of extreme drop-downs.

7. Conclusion

In this study we investigate whether the inclusion of quantitative measures of in-
formation news could improve volatility models to predict the extreme ﬁnancial
returns frequently observed in ﬁnancial time series sampled at high frequencies.
To address this problem, we construct three basic sentiment indexes to measure
the impact of “positive”, “negative”and “high” volatility words, starting from
the raw information ﬂow provided by “FactSet”. The study considers all the
STOXX Europe 600 index constituents sampled at high–frequency, subsequently
aggregated in sectors according to the “FactSet” classiﬁcation. For each sector,
we consider 27 competing models obtained by combining three GARCH- dynam-
ics speciﬁcations (GARCH, EGARCH, GJR–GARCH), three error distributions
(Gaussian, Student–t and GED), and three exogenous covariates models: MIV
accounting for the information volume, MSE accounting for sentiment indexes
and MN where no exogenous regressors are considered. The predictive ability
of each model speciﬁcation is then tested using several criteria. We observe that
the inclusion of information volumes MIV improve the VaR forecast ability, the
general goodness–of–ﬁt, and reduce the maximum loss after a VaR violation
compared to the naive model MN. Statistics for the A/E ratio, AIC and BIC
information criteria (not reported to save space), and maximin AD losses are

17

considered for each sector at both VaR conﬁdence levels τ = 1% and τ = 0.1%.
We also observe that the introduction of exogenous regressors accounting for
the information ﬂow, helps also to explain the seasonal volatility patterns witch
are present in ﬁnancial data sampled at high frequency. Moreover, since dif-
ferent models are available to describe the same data generating process, we
adapt the sequential testing procedure MSC of Hansen (2011) to deliver a set
of statistically equivalent models in terms of their ability to forecast one–step–
ahead VaRs. To achieve this goal we propose to use a loss function penalising
in an asymmetric way returns above and below the forecasted VaR proposed by
Gonzalez–Riviera et al. (2004) for backtesting purposes. Our results conﬁrms
that the MCS provides evidence in favour of MIV models showing that adding
information volume proxies in the volatility dynamics, improves models ability
to predict large losses. Unfortunately, in particular for small conﬁdence levels,
we can not uniquely conclude for the superior VaR forecasting performances of
the models including information, because the MCS ﬁnal set does not contains
only MIV models. For those circumstances we propose a new VaR estimator
that combines the VaRs delivered by those models belonging to the SSM using
a smoother moving average process that guarantees an asymmetric penalisation
of returns above and below the forecasted VaRs which account for the magni-
tude of VaR violations. We show that the MCS procedure along with the VaR
combination technique results in a reduced mean and maximum AD of VaR
violations suggesting that the VaR combination technique helps to reduce the
magnitude of large and extreme VaR violations.

The analysis carried out throughout this paper can be further extended to
account for additional proxies measuring diﬀerent news aﬀecting the stock mar-
ket. In particular, general macroeconomic news can be distinguished by those
aﬀecting only individual institutions. Moreover, it may be interesting to inves-
tigate the impact of information during diﬀerent periods of market turbulence.

Acknowledgments

This research is supported by the Italian Ministry of Research PRIN 2013–
2015, “Multivariate Statistical Methods for Risk Assessment” (MISURA), and
by the “Carlo Giannini Research Fellowship”, the “Centro Interuniversitario di
Econometria” (CIdE) and “UniCredit Foundation”. A special thank goes to
Riccardo Sucapane for his constructive comments and helps in particular to
parallelise the R–code.

Appendix A. Bootstrap resampling

In this appendix we detail the algorithm used to perform the block–bootstrap

to obtain the bootstrapped estimates of var(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) and the p–values of the MCS

statistics of Hansen (2011) described in Section 4. The bootstrap procedure
returns B clones that mimic the structure of the original data. In order to do
this, we ﬁrst estimate the block–length k, using the maximum number of signif-
icant parameters of an AR(p) ﬁtted on the original series; obviously a diﬀerent

18

criteria can be used, or diﬀerent lengths can be tested to verify that results is
not too sensitive to the chosen length k. The procedure can be summarised as
follow.

1. Set the maximum number of block v = ⌊n/k⌋ − 1, where ⌊a⌋ denotes the

smallest integer greater or equal to a.

2. For each j = 1, 2, . . . , v, extract ξb

uniform distribution on {1, 2, . . . , n} and the vector ξb = (cid:0)ξb

of length v contains the starting index of each block.

j ∼ U (1, . . . , n), where U is a discrete
2, . . . , ξb

v(cid:1)

1, ξb

3. Construct the (k × v) matrix Ξb in such a way that the ﬁrst row contains
the vector ξb and subsequent elements are determined as follows: set
Ξb
i−1,j + 1 for i = 2, . . . , k and j = 1, . . . , v, using the convention
that Ξb

i,j − n for those Ξb

i,j = Ξb

i,j = Ξb

i,j > n.

5. Concatenate each column of Ξb in a vector bb = vec(cid:0)Ξb(cid:1) of length

(kv × 1) and if l = n − kv > 0 add l new indexes extracting from
U (1, . . . , n).

6. Extract, from the original series, the observation having the indexes con-

tained in bb and store it.

7. Repeat steps 2–6, for b = 2, 3, . . . , B.

Using the B bootstrap samples obtained from the bootstrap procedure previ-

ously described, it is possible to estimate var(cid:0) ¯di·(cid:1) and var(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) that are neces-

sary to construct the statistic tests, in the following way:

1. deﬁne the bootstrap re–samples averages for ¯dij as follows

¯db
ij =

1
n

nXt=1

db
ij,t

2. estimate the bootstrapped variance as

cvar(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) =

1
B

BXb=1(cid:0) ¯db

ij − ¯dij(cid:1) .

Obviously, the asymptotic distribution of the statistic test Tmax under the null
hypothesis of the model conﬁdence set test deﬁned in Section 4, is nonstandard
and it could be estimated using the empirical cdfs obtained from the previous
bootstrap replications:

Tb

R,M = max
i,j∈M

| ¯db

ij − ¯dij |

qcvar(cid:0) ¯dij(cid:1) .

19

Finally, the p–values could be calculated as:

PR,M =

1
B

BXb=1

1TR,M>Tb

R,M

.

20

Appendix B. Tables

τ

Sector

1%

0.1%

MIV MSE MN # MIV MSE MN #

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

100
100
100
25
32
100
26
100

0

100

0

100
100
100
100
100
25
100
100

0
0
0
38
32
0
39
0
18
0
36
0
0
0
0
0
38
0
0

0
0
0
38
37
0
35
0
82
0
64
0
0
0
0
0
38
0
0

1
6
1
24
19
2
23
1
11
1
11
4
1
1
5
1
24
5
6

100
100
100
33
35
100
38
32
33
33
33
30
100
35
100
37
38
40
42

0
0
0
33
29
0
31
41
33
33
28
35
0
30
0
32
25
27
26

0
0
0
33
35
0
31
27
33
33
39
35
0
35
0
32
38
33
32

4
1
5
18
17
6
16
22
18
18
18
20
5
23
1
19
16
15
19

Table B.1: Total number and percentage composition of models belonging to the SSM,
ˆM∗
1−α, at the end of the MCS procedure, for each sector and covariate speciﬁcation. We
consider two conﬁdence levels τ = 0.1% and τ = 1%.

21

Name
Electronic Technology
Non-Energy Minerals
Health Technology
Distribution services
Finance
Technology Services
Process Industries
Commercial services
Utilities
Health Services
Retail Trade
Energy Minerals
Consumer services
Consumer non-durables
Producer Manufacturing
Industrial Services
Communications
Transportation
Consumer durables

Min
-1.401
-2.316
-0.959
-1.549
-1.004
-1.415
-1.044
-1.058
-0.555
-1.088
-0.647
-1.258
-1.097
-0.778
-1.204
-1.351
-1.967
-1.288
-1.126

Max Mean×103
1.892
2.457
1.103
1.203
1.183
1.510
1.271
1.382
0.762
1.746
1.275
1.094
1.546
0.827
2.031
1.573
3.856
1.269
3.027

0.324
0.336
1.436
1.182
1.580
0.675
1.378
1.624
0.019
1.609
0.607
1.296
1.601
0.747
1.546
0.905
0.436
0.864
2.192

Std. Dev.

Skewness Kurtosis

1% Str. Lev.

JB

0.107
0.174
0.073
0.077
0.087
0.094
0.087
0.084
0.073
0.083
0.082
0.123
0.091
0.063
0.100
0.108
0.117
0.094
0.111

0.712
0.372
0.431
-0.203
0.365
-0.542
0.221
0.883
0.215
1.269
0.638
0.190
1.611
0.728
1.715
0.291
3.00
-0.198
2.696

34.187
27.24
23.514
42.982
21.263
36.129
20.02
35.355
10.556
46.001
17.235
12.471
39.201
22.188
46.850
19.142
161.957
27.070
73.858

-0.291
-0.431
-0.188
-0.184
-0.218
-0.234
-0.223
-0.205
-0.207
-0.201
-0.220
-0.309
-0.218
-0.162
-0.244
-0.278
-0.282
-0.235
-0.279

425303.609
269749.330
201117.210
671177.482
164436.848
474597.978
145674.251
455194.806
40552.287
771047.391
108503.601
56553.002
562015.749
179610.301
801616.206
133230.915
9541186.331
266254.814
1992147.898

2
2

Table B.2: Summary statistics of each sector log–returns in percentage points, for the period 17/08/2012 09:00:00 to 01/02/2013 09:40:00. The
seventh column, denoted by “1% Str. Lev.” is the 1% empirical quantile of the returns distribution, while the last column, denoted by “JB” is the
value of the Jarque-Ber´a test–statistics.

2
3

Name

Max

Mean

Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis JB×10−6 Max Mean Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis JB×10−6

LAGVOL

NUMB

47789.1

14435.57

80542954 430265.82 1364898.01
Electronic Technology
4772977
120300.14
Non-Energy Minerals
31536002 173898.02 672731.54
Health Technology
1553772
33421.05
Distribution services
45639830 442359.14 1145068.11
Finance
58768687 198602.17 908170.62
Technology Services
113420.64
3574375
Process Industries
24117.66
369917
Commercial services
7148018
174961.72
Utilities
4330320
87986.03
Health Services
15952647 147346.78 340712.62
Retail Trade
12117418 115305.52 263236.58
Energy Minerals
Consumer services
26011209 149917.34 493367.72
Consumer non-durables 17447157 137296.42 381029.69
Producer Manufacturing 22102513 117743.99 424997.45
Industrial Services
142155.51
Communications
Transportation
Consumer durables

66441.23
57034.49
27104.64
81704.94

51038.8
18613.36
76344.43
32169.87

7168024
6464633
2705466
8070407

164533
65832.05
196434.14

38.23
17.87
32.78
21.97
22.48
47.17
17.3
5.76
20.75
31.45
25.36
24.94
38.38
22.94
31.07
24.67
20.41
22.33
19.71

1889.12
496.12
1286.22
754.79
723.57
2643.35
427.37
44.28
637.42
1316.22
926.35
920.34
1780.23
765.24
1275.47
951.03
616.6
689.5
594.8

1298.64 2355 11.65
249
1.06
89.88
1343 6.72
602.58
269
0.59
207.67
190.94
3476 14.66
2541.67 2138 8.09
2.20
66.79
0.92
0.76
2.73
148.23
1.68
630.82
5.67
312.68
308.62
3.90
1153.49 1408 6.91
711
3.63
1164 3.77
1.60
406
0.96
188
0.98
213
555
2.13

213.5
592.41
329.46
138.73
173.44
129.09

591
215
836
345
942
636

94.39
9.68
52.97
6.14

114.54
68.63
18.01
8.15
23.20
13.90
47.34
31.65
54.71
29.27
32.68
13.22
8.19
8.93
18.33

10.52
12.68
10.82
21.05
11.66
12.00
12.66
12.26
14.98
11.70
10.88
10.69
10.79
10.92
13.40
13.32
11.79
13.10
12.02

129.45
198.61
140.37
659.37
182.00
193.73
224.37
181.72
322.98
163.72
135.44
127.30
140.27
141.44
267.79
234.39
162.91
208.70
191.27

6.25
14.56
7.33
158.59
12.23
13.84
18.52
12.21
38.22
9.94
6.84
6.05
7.32
7.44
26.31
20.22
9.84
16.07
13.50

Table B.3: Summary statistics of the exogenous regressors belonging to the Information Volumes MIV regressor set.

HIGH

POS

NEG

Name

Max Mean Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis JB×10−6 Max Mean Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis JB×10−6 Max Mean Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis JB×10−6

Electronic Technology
Non-Energy Minerals
Health Technology
Distribution services
Finance
Technology Services
Process Industries
Commercial services
Utilities
Health Services
Retail Trade
Energy Minerals
Consumer services
Consumer non-durables
Producer Manufacturing
Industrial Services
Communications
Transportation
Consumer durables

178
31
105
40
320
146
53
31
71
38
132
90
99
78
99
50
53
29
69

0.96
0.13
0.53
0.06
1.44
0.53
0.22
0.07
0.19
0.12
0.61
0.42
0.46
0.31
0.33
0.16
0.11
0.09
0.22

7.93
1.27
4.57
0.81
12.12
4.46
2.08
0.75
1.96
1.18
5.59

4

3.86
2.86
3.15
1.59
1.22
0.95
2.11

11.1
13.23
12.28
24.82
11.51
12.83
14.36
18.43
18.67
15.25
12.68
12.85
11.54
13.79
14.72
16.6
21.1
16.26
14.25

144.6
204.89
178.44
879.51
160.96
231.45
256.42
491.65
461.07
304.95
194.57
186.96
160.65
237.36
281.97
356.19
643.89
332.13
270.56

7.78
15.51
11.79
281.92

9.6
19.7
24.19
88.31
77.74
34.12
13.99
12.94
9.57
20.74
29.2
46.49
151.27
40.46
26.89

87
18
69
8
140
66
21
13
69
22
63
32
66
35
47
32
44
13
24

0.49
0.07
0.32
0.02
0.69
0.3
0.09
0.04
0.09
0.07
0.33
0.15
0.26
0.15
0.14
0.07
0.09
0.04
0.09

4.22
0.65
2.84
0.29
5.75
2.62
0.87
0.42
1.07
0.69
3.11
1.39
2.24
1.31
1.31
0.74
0.91
0.46
0.87

10.87
13.38
12.18
15.79
11.58
11.75
13.59
15.28
36.35
15.06

12

13.53
11.87
12.14
14.54
21.03
23.24
16.63
13.46

130.93
221.72
173.96
295.05
161.62
164.91
223.37
290.35
2046.68
288.78
164.65
218.3
181.43
180.09
302.54
623.38
840.77
336.18
231.23

6.4
18.12
11.21
31.99
9.68
10.08
18.4
30.97

1523.71

30.63
10.06
17.58
12.16

12

33.56
141.82
257.59
41.46
19.69

88
18
32
16
177
90
19
12
25
13
47
40
55
36
39
18
11
23
24

0.44
0.06
0.19
0.02
0.71
0.3
0.09
0.03
0.08
0.06
0.24
0.19
0.23
0.12
0.16
0.07
0.03
0.05
0.08

3.72
0.62
1.69
0.28
6.06
2.59
0.85
0.40
0.75
0.56
2.24
1.79
1.94
1.15
1.49
0.69
0.36
0.54
0.78

10.89
15.92
11.04
29.91
12.25
13.46
12.85
16.44
16.13
13.35
12.31
13.10
11.73
14.34
13.11
15.17
16.21
20.90
14.30

136.66
303.92
135.17
1321.7
195.93
261.15
192.73
335.07
339.99
207.19
177.21
203.21
174.29
261.66
208.06
282.6
330.23
615.66
258.08

6.96
33.92
6.82
635.93
14.16
25.04
13.73
41.18
42.37
15.85
11.63
15.25
11.24
25.17
15.98
29.35
40.00
138.34
24.49

2
4

Table B.4: Summary statistics of the exogenous regressors belonging to the Sentiment MSE regressor set.

τ = 1%

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
0.77
0.60
Commercial services
0.60
Communications
0.77
0.72
0.67
Consumer durables
1.09
0.58
Consumer non-durables
0.72
Consumer services
0.86
0.84
0.58
Distribution services
0.84
0.81
Electronic Technology
0.42
Energy Minerals
0.74
0.88
0.58
Finance
0.53
0.44
Health Services
0.63
Health Technology
1.07
0.56
0.47
Industrial Services
0.51
0.37
Non-Energy Minerals
0.58
Process Industries
0.70
0.58
Producer Manufacturing 0.53
1.23
0.86
Retail Trade
0.70
Technology Services
0.91
1.07
0.77
Transportation
1.51
Utilities
1.09

0.86
0.79
0.84
0.98
0.91
0.72
1.19
1.02 0.60
0.86
0.95
1.14
0.67 1.00
0.98
1.12
0.63
1.37
1.09
0.67
0.93
1.14
0.77
0.77
0.93
0.49
0.98
0.72
0.49
0.70
0.88
0.51
0.88
0.86
0.72
0.70
0.67
0.44
0.67
1.07
0.72
1.07
0.63 0.72
0.67
0.79
1.30
1.30
0.63 1.05
0.86
1.09
1.09
1.30
1.42
1.51
1.58

0.58
0.60 0.93
4.63
4.40 1.14
4.65
4.21 0.74
0.93
0.74 0.86
1.37
2.77 0.95
1.14
2.95 0.81
0.79
0.81 0.84
0.60
0.58 0.77
0.60
0.77 0.49
0.49
0.51 0.53
0.88
2.65 0.58
0.47 0.74
0.49
2.58 0.67 0.91
0.65 0.84
0.63
0.49
0.56 0.63
1.16
0.86 0.84
0.77
0.72 0.86
1.49
3.56 1.35
1.19 1.60
1.23

0.60
0.65 0.81
2.84
2.67 0.70
2.65
2.42 1.16
0.77
0.67 0.74
0.70
0.67 0.77
0.83
0.86 0.67
0.78
0.81 0.70
0.60
0.58 0.74
0.58
0.74 0.47
0.49
0.44 0.49
0.79
0.72 0.49
0.47
0.47 0.65
0.37
0.42 0.51
0.60
0.60 0.77
0.51 0.58
0.51
0.84 0.79 0.98
0.70
0.74 0.65
0.79
0.88 1.14
1.16 1.26
1.23

0.88
0.81
0.74
0.93
0.84
0.91
0.88
0.65
1.00
0.77
0.88
0.51
0.49
0.67
0.67
1.14
0.84
0.98
1.30

0.74
0.84
0.74
0.70
1.00
0.65
0.47
0.56
0.21
0.51
0.56
0.42
0.49
0.63
0.42
1.09
0.56
1.00
1.26

0.77
1.00
1.37
0.98
1.02
1.16
0.93
0.79
0.93
0.56
0.98
0.79
0.84
1.02
0.72
1.21
0.91
1.21
1.79

0.70
0.79
0.77
0.84
0.86
0.79
0.95
0.65
0.88
0.58
0.77
0.53
0.51
0.60
0.67
1.02
0.86
1.00
1.28

0.77
0.74
0.72
0.98
0.91
0.72
0.86
0.72
0.88
0.56
0.93
0.56
0.53
0.67
0.58
1.14
0.81
0.93
1.44

0.84
1.16
1.37
1.12
1.00
1.49
1.09
1.19
0.77
0.60
0.84
0.95
0.84
1.07
0.65
1.37
0.93
1.21
1.47

0.67
0.67
0.79
0.56
0.88
0.65
0.84
0.56
0.60
0.47
0.67
0.47
0.44
0.65
0.56
0.98
0.84
0.81
0.91

0.77
0.88
1.16
0.81
1.07
0.72
0.95
0.72
0.88
0.65
0.81
0.63
0.44
0.98
0.67
1.44
0.88
1.12
1.58

0.77
0.91
1.12
1.23
1.40
0.91
0.51
0.98
0.63
0.70
0.91
0.84
0.72
1.23
0.70
1.35
0.77
1.51
1.81

0.81
0.93
1.23
0.86
1.05
0.79
0.93
0.91
0.93
0.63
0.81
0.67
0.49
0.98
0.67
1.44
0.88
1.14
1.53

0.58
0.65
0.67
0.56
0.74
0.63
0.79
0.65
0.60
0.47
0.63
0.44
0.44
0.65
0.49
0.93
0.72
0.79
1.00

0.98
0.88
0.72
0.98
0.84
0.84
0.72
0.88
0.56
0.51
0.65
0.74
0.63
0.84
0.67
0.98
0.72
1.19
1.91

0.58
0.51
0.63
0.67
0.77
0.65
0.65
0.44
0.47
0.37
0.47
0.42
0.28
0.67
0.53
0.74
0.67
0.74
0.95

0.67
0.74
0.79
0.53
0.81
0.70
0.79
0.70
0.67
0.49
0.67
0.56
0.49
0.58
0.56
0.93
0.79
0.86
0.86

0.58
0.53
0.58
0.58
0.72
0.65
0.70
0.44
0.40
0.37
0.53
0.42
0.35
0.51
0.51
0.70
0.60
0.84
0.72

0.72
0.77
0.58
0.70
0.95
0.67
0.00
0.67
0.26
0.53
0.26
0.40
0.49
0.65
0.37
1.26
0.00
1.02
1.12

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

2
5

τ = 0.1%

3.00

3.00 3.50

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing 3.00
Retail Trade
3.75
3.00
Technology Services
2.25
Transportation
Utilities
3.75

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
2.00
2.25
2.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.00
0.50
2.75
2.25
2.75
2.50
2.50
3.00
1.50
2.50 1.00
2.75
2.00
3.25
0.00
2.00 1.00
1.00
2.25
0.50
3.25
0.75
2.50
1.00
2.50
2.50
0.75
2.00 1.00
1.00
1.50
1.75 1.00
2.75 1.25
2.00
2.00
1.50
3.50
1.75
0.00
2.50
1.75
2.25
3.25
2.00

3.00 3.50
3.25
13.00 3.50 14.50 22.75 5.50 23.75
10.75 3.50 12.50 19.50 2.50 22.50
3.00
3.25 3.50
4.75
3.00 2.75
5.00
5.75 3.25
3.25
3.50 3.25
2.00 2.50
2.50
3.25
3.25 3.00
2.00
2.25 3.00
2.75
2.25 2.25
1.75
2.00 2.25
3.50
2.00 2.00
2.75
3.00 4.00
2.75
3.25 2.50
3.50 3.25
4.25
2.75
3.00 3.50
5.25
2.00 3.25
4.00 3.50
4.00

2.50 3.75
24.00 3.00
24.50 3.25
3.50 3.50
2.00 2.25
3.50 3.00
2.00 3.00
23.25 2.00
2.00 2.75
22.00 2.50
3.00 3.25
2.75 2.75
4.00 3.25
2.75 4.50
31.25 4.75
4.25 3.75

2.00
1.75
2.00
1.50
2.00
2.00
1.50
1.00
1.75
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.50
1.75
1.50
3.00
2.00
1.75
1.25

2.25
1.75
2.50
1.25
2.25
2.00
2.00
1.50
2.00
1.25
1.25
1.50
1.75
1.75
1.75
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.75

2.00
1.75
2.25
2.75
2.25
2.25
2.00
1.00
2.25
1.25
2.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.00
3.50
2.00
2.00
3.25

3.25
3.00
2.50
3.75
5.25
2.25
1.00
3.50
1.75
2.25
3.75
1.50
1.75
3.50
2.00
4.25
3.00
4.50
5.75

1.50
1.00
0.75
0.75
1.75
0.50
1.75
0.50
1.75
0.50
0.50
0.50
1.00
1.50
1.00
1.25
1.25
1.00
1.00

1.75
1.00
0.25
1.25
1.75
0.75
1.25
0.25
1.25
0.50
1.00
0.50
1.00
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.00
1.00
1.00

1.25
1.25
0.75
1.50
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.50
0.75
0.75
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.75
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
1.50

3.50
3.50
2.25
4.00
3.25
3.75
3.25
2.75
3.25
3.00
2.25
2.50
2.25
3.75
3.25
3.75
4.50
3.50
4.50

4.50
4.75
6.25
5.00
5.25
7.00
5.50
4.75
4.50
3.25
4.75
3.50
3.75
4.50
4.75
6.25
4.75
5.50
6.25

4.75
4.75
6.75
4.75
5.00
7.25
5.75
4.00
6.00
3.50
4.25
4.25
3.75
4.50
4.25
7.00
5.25
5.00
8.50

4.25
4.50
5.50
5.00
5.25
7.00
5.75
3.75
6.00
3.25
4.00
3.75
4.00
4.75
4.50
6.25
4.50
5.25
6.00

4.75
4.25
4.75
4.00
4.75
4.75
5.75
4.25
4.25
3.00
4.00
3.50
3.00
4.00
4.50
6.25
4.75
6.00
6.75

5.00
5.00
7.00
4.50
5.50
7.50
5.50
4.75
4.50
3.25
4.75
3.50
3.50
4.25
3.75
7.00
4.50
7.00
7.25

3.50
3.75
3.00
4.75
3.75
4.00
3.50
3.00
3.75
3.25
2.25
2.25
2.50
3.50
3.00
4.75
4.25
4.75
5.50

3.00
2.25
2.50
2.25
2.25
2.00
2.25
1.75
3.00
2.75
2.75
1.75
1.75
2.25
2.00
3.25
2.50
1.75
2.75

2.00
2.25
2.50
2.00
2.50
1.75
2.00
1.75
2.50
1.25
1.75
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.50
2.75
2.50
1.75
3.00

2.75
2.25
3.00
2.50
3.25
2.25
3.00
2.25
3.25
2.00
2.75
1.75
1.75
2.75
3.00
3.50
2.75
2.50
3.50

4.25
3.75
4.75
4.00
4.25
4.25
5.00
3.50
4.00
3.25
4.00
3.25
3.00
4.50
4.50
5.75
4.75
5.00
5.50

2.75
3.00
4.20
3.25
2.50
3.50
2.00
2.50
1.75
2.00
3.00
2.75
3.75
2.75
2.00
3.75

Table B.5: Actual over expected (A/E) VaR exceedance rates for all models at conﬁdence levels τ = (1%, 0.1%). For each sector, in bold we
denote the A/E value closest to one.

τ = 1%

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

0.53

0.77
0.30
0.31

0.32
0.41
1.19
1.14

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
0.76 0.71 0.72 0.73 0.72 0.69 0.82 0.49 0.42 0.75 0.72 0.60 0.71 0.60 0.53 0.75 0.74
0.76
0.73
0.78 0.82
Commercial services
1.04 0.76 1.03 1.17 1.04 1.17 1.20 1.02 1.20 1.06
Communications
1.02 1.06 1.02 1.07 1.08 1.01 1.11 1.06
1.08
1.07 1.09
0.64 0.63
0.64 0.66 0.44 0.68 0.66 0.50 0.70 0.65
0.64 0.28 0.63 0.70 0.62 0.70 0.72 0.49 0.78 0.64
0.63
Consumer durables
0.31 0.32 0.26 0.32
0.32 0.28 0.29 0.30 0.30 0.28 0.32 0.33
0.32
0.33 0.29 0.28 0.32 0.31 0.28 0.33 0.32
Consumer non-durables
0.87 0.88 0.85 0.87 0.90 0.80 0.89 0.90 0.35 0.89 0.91 0.78 0.91 0.88 0.78 0.89 0.89
0.88
Consumer services
0.90
0.89 0.91
1.43
1.43 1.45
1.40 1.42 1.39 1.34 1.43 1.34 1.42 1.42 1.10 1.42 1.43 1.35 1.43 1.42 1.40 1.42 1.41
1.41
Distribution services
1.16
1.14 1.16 0.69 0.72 1.16 0.72 1.13 1.18 0.12 1.18 1.18 0.68 1.17 1.19 0.68 1.17 1.17
Electronic Technology
1.15 1.17
1.15
0.91
0.91 0.82
0.91 0.82 0.72 0.91 0.82 0.71 0.91 0.88
0.76 0.53 0.90 0.80 0.73 0.89 0.80 0.71 0.89 0.88
Energy Minerals
0.59 0.39 0.59 0.63 0.59 0.61 0.64 0.59 0.61 0.61
Finance
0.62
0.62 0.66
0.61 0.64 0.59 0.62 0.65 0.58 0.61 0.60
0.55 0.27 0.74 0.64 0.58 0.77 0.61 0.57 0.76 0.52
Health Services
0.78
0.79 0.73
0.75 0.55 0.59 0.76 0.64 0.59 0.79 0.62
0.28
0.29 0.28
0.34 0.32 0.29 0.31 0.27 0.30 0.31 0.31
0.31
0.30 0.26 0.28 0.28 0.34 0.29 0.31 0.34
Health Technology
0.59 0.28 0.63 0.45 0.38 0.63 0.52 0.40 0.62 0.58
Industrial Services
0.65
0.66 0.50
0.64 0.42 0.46 0.65 0.48 0.38 0.67 0.62
2.01 1.99 1.82 2.00 2.04 1.88 1.96 1.97 0.39 1.99 1.96 1.55 1.96 1.92 1.50 1.92 2.03
2.00
Non-Energy Minerals
2.04
2.03 2.04
0.54 0.31 0.65 0.58 0.51 0.65 0.55 0.46 0.65 0.58
0.67 0.56 0.47 0.67 0.58 0.47 0.67 0.55
0.66 0.53
0.66
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing 0.77 0.30 0.75 0.61 0.46 0.76 0.58 0.46 0.75 0.79
0.77
0.78 0.61
0.77 0.64 0.47 0.78 0.78 0.44 0.78 0.78
0.46 0.31 0.45 0.44 0.43 0.43 0.43 0.42 0.42 0.49
Retail Trade
0.43
0.45 0.42
0.49 0.49 0.43 0.49 0.43 0.42 0.48 0.46
0.96 0.97 0.68 0.96 0.96 0.76 0.96 0.97 0.34 0.97 0.98 0.67 0.96 0.98 0.66 0.98 0.98
0.96
Technology Services
0.97
0.97 0.97
0.50 0.39 0.50 0.49 0.48 0.49 0.57 0.52 0.50 0.51
Transportation
0.50
0.49 0.49
0.52 0.51 0.48 0.51 0.51 0.47 0.52 0.97
0.40 0.28 0.39 0.36 0.36 0.37 0.39 0.36 0.39 0.41
0.41 0.37 0.36 0.40 0.40 0.36 0.41 0.40
0.38 0.39
0.40
Utilities

0.73
0.78
1.09
1.06
0.65
0.64
0.30
0.32
0.91
0.87
1.43
1.41
1.18
1.15
0.81
0.91
0.65
0.60
0.76
0.65
0.30 0.26
0.56
0.65
2.04
2.04
0.65
0.56
0.66
0.76
0.43
0.45
0.99
0.97
0.51
0.50
0.39
0.37

0.50
0.98
0.43
0.31
0.81
1.33
0.72
0.68
0.60
0.55
0.29
0.36
1.50
0.47
0.44
0.42
0.68
0.45
0.34

0.56
0.78
0.28
0.28
0.49
1.26
0.43
0.58
0.42
0.36
0.29
0.29
0.56
0.33
0.39
0.39
0.69
0.40
0.28

0.79
1.30
0.67
0.65
0.58
0.53
0.27
0.35
1.39
0.42
0.41
0.42
0.66
0.44
0.33

0.55
0.59
0.28
0.44
0.31

0.31
0.55
0.61

0.51
0.99
0.42

0.41
0.30

0.28

0.47

0.98

2
6

τ = 0.1%

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

0.33
0.59
0.18
0.26

0.40
0.51
0.08
0.24
0.25
1.02
0.99
0.33
0.20
0.15
0.20
0.11

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
0.66 0.62 0.46 0.60 0.47 0.45 0.65 0.46
0.53
0.60 0.51 0.59 0.55 0.53 0.56 0.69 0.43
0.49
0.56
0.29 0.55 0.64
Commercial services
0.92 0.98 0.92 0.98 1.00 0.91 1.03 0.82 0.45 0.80
0.86 1.12 0.93 1.12 1.16 0.90 1.16 0.98
0.87
Communications
0.84
0.84 0.87
0.66
0.56 0.59 0.29 0.61 0.53 0.31 0.57 0.44 0.03 0.41
0.49 0.64 0.54 0.64 0.65 0.27 0.68 0.56
0.50
Consumer durables
0.41 0.41
0.07
0.40
0.16
0.23 0.19 0.21 0.21 0.19 0.21 0.23 0.28
0.28 0.23 0.22 0.27 0.26 0.22 0.28 0.17
0.17 0.18 0.07 0.20
0.16
0.23
Consumer non-durables
0.72 0.74 0.75 0.73 0.89 0.69 0.75 0.83 0.22 0.82 0.85 0.67 0.84 0.81 0.68 0.82 0.65
0.73
Consumer services
0.62
0.52
0.65 0.71
0.67
1.28
1.32 1.34 1.32 1.34 1.36 1.26 1.34 1.38 0.96 1.38 1.39 1.29 1.39 1.38 1.35 1.38 1.28
1.32
1.30 1.35
1.12
1.33
Distribution services
0.88
0.99 1.01 0.57 1.01 1.01 0.62 0.95 1.11 0.07 1.10 1.11 0.58 1.10 1.12 0.58 1.10 0.93
0.88 0.93
0.39
0.88
1.01
Electronic Technology
0.84 0.71 0.63 0.83 0.72 0.61 0.83 0.64
0.76 0.64 0.62 0.76 0.63 0.60 0.75 0.80
0.69
0.70 0.62 0.31 0.70
0.36
0.62
Energy Minerals
0.54 0.58 0.52 0.57 0.60 0.51 0.55 0.38 0.13 0.37
0.47 0.53 0.52 0.51 0.54 0.51 0.49 0.55
0.47
Finance
0.43
0.44 0.52
0.42
0.70 0.43 0.48 0.71 0.54 0.48 0.74 0.33 0.12 0.60
0.67 0.55
0.20
0.64
0.64 0.48 0.44 0.67 0.42 0.43 0.67 0.39
0.34
Health Services
0.14 0.15 0.03 0.14
0.07
0.28 0.26 0.21 0.24 0.21 0.23 0.24 0.10
0.18 0.14 0.19 0.15 0.33 0.20 0.19 0.29
0.08
0.19
Health Technology
0.47 0.29 0.30 0.48 0.31 0.29 0.45 0.48
0.56 0.33 0.31 0.56 0.35 0.29 0.59 0.34 0.09 0.38
0.42
Industrial Services
0.14
0.40 0.23
0.39
1.80 0.16 1.82 1.79 1.63 1.80 2.02 1.71 1.72 1.86
Non-Energy Minerals
1.75
1.74 1.76
0.72
1.88 1.85 1.30 1.85 1.79 1.24 1.79 1.74
1.74
0.48 0.23
0.23
0.61 0.46 0.39 0.61 0.50 0.38 0.62 0.28 0.09 0.47
0.54 0.42 0.43 0.55 0.38 0.36 0.54 0.49
Process Industries
0.37
0.48
0.59 0.31 0.10 0.59
0.16
0.56
0.71 0.54 0.38 0.72 0.72 0.34 0.72 0.61
0.64 0.40 0.35 0.65 0.37 0.35 0.64 0.74
Producer Manufacturing 0.67
0.31 0.26 0.20 0.29
0.21
0.25
0.35 0.33 0.34 0.31 0.31 0.33 0.34 0.44
0.35
Retail Trade
0.44 0.44 0.36 0.44 0.36 0.35 0.43 0.27
0.78 0.77
0.42
0.78
0.84 0.86 0.58 0.84 0.85 0.69 0.84 0.92 0.16 0.91 0.92 0.58 0.90 0.93 0.56 0.92 0.80
0.85
Technology Services
0.79
0.31 0.31 0.18 0.31
0.21
0.31
0.46 0.46 0.41 0.46 0.45 0.40 0.46 0.79
0.39 0.38 0.39 0.38 0.56 0.45 0.38 0.46
0.39
Transportation
Utilities
0.31
0.30 0.27 0.28 0.27 0.30 0.29 0.30 0.37
0.36 0.32 0.30 0.36 0.35 0.30 0.36 0.25
0.24
0.14
0.25 0.26 0.13 0.29

0.45
0.88
0.46
0.16
0.71
1.33
0.96
0.60
0.50
0.42
0.10
0.25
1.76
0.31
0.40
0.23
0.84
0.35
0.21

0.40
0.53
0.20
0.43
0.19
0.24
0.23
0.49
0.61

0.16
0.15
0.20
0.85
0.25
0.19

0.10
0.29
1.06
0.20
0.32

0.11
0.20
0.46
0.19
0.15

0.30
0.68
0.09

0.11
0.50
0.14

0.50
1.07
0.38

0.38
0.16

0.31
0.25

0.38

0.36

0.09

0.16

Table B.6: Maximum AD in percentage points at conﬁdence level τ = 1%. For each sector, in bold we denote the minimum AD.

τ = 1%

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

τ = 0.1%

2
7

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

9.27

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
0.38
9.27
0.38
9.27
4.36
1.82
0.21
60.61
4.36
30.44
0.21
23.47
23.47
17.67
0.00
6.45
0.21
38.59
0.06
0.00
0.67
71.39
0.11
0.01
0.00
0.03
2.86
0.21
0.21
0.06
16.49
30.44
2.86
47.87
71.39
9.27
0.24
60.61

0.21
9.27
17.67 23.47 12.97 30.44 9.27 80.99 23.47
38.59 47.87 58.15 47.87 4.36 80.99 93.07 38.59 33.88
0.00
0.00
33.88 50.69 16.49 94.79 0.38 27.07 2.58
2.58
58.15 17.67 16.49 30.44 69.27 30.44 41.76 80.99 80.99 50.69
2.58
71.39
4.36
41.76
12.97 69.27
4.36
0.38
9.27 41.76 12.97 38.59 27.07
0.38
9.27
38.59
0.01
0.38
1.12
38.59 17.67 47.87 17.67 38.59 0.03 38.59 80.99 1.12 23.47
4.36 30.44 12.97 6.45 69.27
0.01
0.67
0.00
0.00
1.82 23.47 0.67 23.47
47.87
0.67
80.99 16.49 80.99 71.39 4.36 71.39 94.79 23.47 71.39
1.82
1.82
0.01
1.12
0.83
6.99 12.97 6.99 21.29 80.99 2.58
33.88
38.59
9.27
0.36
50.69
0.06
16.49

1.82
1.82
12.97
0.11
82.85 80.99 1.82 93.07 94.79 23.47 93.07 38.59
1.12
58.15 58.15 1.82 60.61 58.15 4.36 60.61 23.47
0.11
0.38
0.01
1.82
0.01
0.00
1.12
0.11
1.82
0.83
80.99
38.59 30.44 0.67 82.85 47.87 4.36 58.15 23.47
41.76 6.99 60.61 60.61 21.29 27.07 21.29 17.67
0.15
47.87

1.80
47.87 12.97 50.69 0.67
0.03
80.99 47.87 9.27
0.67
2.86

0.21
0.06
0.21
0.21
4.36
1.12
2.86
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.03
2.86
0.38
23.47
4.36

2.86
12.97
9.27
23.47
30.44
12.97
69.27
1.12
38.59
0.21
9.27
0.06
0.03
0.38
1.82
94.79
30.44
93.07
9.45

0.21
1.12
1.82
0.11
6.45
0.67
12.97
1.12
0.38
0.01
0.67
0.00
0.00
1.12
0.01
58.15
4.36
12.97
93.07

1.12
0.00
0.00
1.82
1.82
30.44
17.67
0.21
6.45
0.00
4.36
0.01
0.00
0.38
0.03
23.47
6.45
38.59
33.88

0.38
0.00
0.00
9.27
2.86
0.00
0.00
0.38
0.21
0.01
12.97
0.01
0.00
0.38
0.03
80.99
2.86
12.97
16.49

4.36
9.27
0.21
2.86
69.27
1.82
0.00
1.82
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.01
1.12
0.00
12.58
0.00
94.79
50.69

9.27
6.45
4.36
80.99
47.87
4.36
30.44
4.36
38.59
0.11
58.15
0.11
0.06
1.82
0.21
41.76
17.67
58.15
0.83

1.82
6.45
12.97
0.06
17.67
2.86
12.97
2.86
1.82
0.01
1.82
0.11
0.01
0.21
0.11
58.15
12.97
30.44
30.44

0.38
0.00
0.00
6.45
0.00
0.00
17.67
0.21
9.27
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.00
1.12
0.11
30.44
4.36
0.00
27.07

58.15
41.76
6.45
30.44
69.27
17.67
23.47
9.27
0.01
0.06
0.21
6.45
1.82
23.47
0.67
23.47
30.44
3.65
0.04

0.21
0.03
0.67
1.82
9.27
1.12
1.12
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
1.82
0.06
6.45
1.82
6.45
69.27

38.59
17.67
6.45
58.15
23.47
47.87
38.59
1.12
93.07
9.27
38.59
0.03
0.01
1.82
1.82
41.76
23.47
80.99
6.99

17.67
2.86
33.88
6.45
9.27
1.82
2.86
6.45
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.12
0.03
9.27
0.21
12.97
1.12
41.76
12.58

6.45
23.47
6.45
2.86
93.07
1.12
0.01
0.11
0.00
0.03
0.11
0.00
0.01
0.67
0.00
60.61
0.11
93.07
12.58

58.15 80.99 0.01 58.15 58.15 0.11
0.67
0.03

2.86
3.65
9.27
0.24
0.00

2.58 33.88 23.47 0.36

23.47
4.36

2.86
1.82

1.82
0.01

1.23

2.86

4.36

4.36

4.36

0.11

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.55

1.82

4.36

0.01

0.67

0.24

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
2.09
5.20
24.47
5.20
0.77
11.83
2.09
0.77
2.09
0.26
2.09
0.77
0.08
11.83
11.83
86.22
0.08
5.20
2.09
86.22
2.09
2.09
86.22
11.83
45.66
24.47
0.77
11.83
0.26
11.83
0.02
0.01
0.26
2.09
24.47
5.20
0.01
0.08

0.26
5.20
2.09
5.20
5.20
11.83
5.20
24.47
0.26
0.77
0.77
24.47
24.47
5.20
11.83
0.08
2.09
24.47
0.77

0.26
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.26
0.00
0.02
11.83
0.08
5.20
5.20
11.83
11.83
0.26
0.08
0.02
0.26
11.83
0.00

0.26
0.00
0.00
0.77
0.26
0.00
0.00
2.09
0.02
11.83
2.09
24.47
11.83
0.26
0.77
0.01
0.77
11.83
0.01

0.26
0.00
0.00
2.09
0.00
0.00
0.02
11.83
0.02
11.83
0.00
11.83
0.00
0.26
0.77
0.00
0.77
0.00
0.00

0.77
5.20
0.26
2.09
0.08
5.20
0.26
5.20
0.08
11.83
0.77
24.47
24.47
0.77
0.26
0.02
0.77
2.09
0.02

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.77
0.08
0.08
2.09
0.26
0.26
5.20
5.20
11.83
0.00
2.09
0.08
0.02
0.08
0.02

0.02
0.00
2.09
0.01
0.26
0.08
0.02
5.20
0.26
0.26
11.83
0.77
2.09
0.08
0.77
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.08
0.00
0.00
0.26
0.00
0.00
0.08
2.09
0.08
11.83
0.77
24.47
0.02
0.77
0.77
0.00
0.77
0.00
0.00

0.08
0.26
2.09
0.01
0.00
5.20
86.22
0.02
24.47
5.20
0.01
45.66
24.47
0.02
11.83
0.00
0.26
0.00
0.00

11.83
5.20
2.09
11.83
2.09
24.47
11.83
24.47
2.09
76.34
24.47
45.66
24.47
11.83
2.09
0.77
2.09
24.47
0.26

11.83
24.47
5.20
0.77
5.20
5.20
11.83
86.22
5.20
76.34
2.09
86.22
45.66
11.83
11.83
0.02
11.83
11.83
0.08

11.83
24.47
11.83
45.66
11.83
11.83
45.66
86.22
24.47
86.22
86.22
86.22
45.66
24.47
45.66
0.26
11.83
24.47
76.34

76.34
76.34
49.05
45.66
86.22
49.05
20.58
20.58
49.05
49.05
76.34
86.22
49.05
49.05
86.22
86.22
20.58
86.22
45.66

24.47
86.22
5.21
76.34
24.47
49.05
76.34
5.21
76.34
20.58
86.22
20.58
86.22
49.05
86.22
76.34
86.22
86.22
86.22

45.66
86.22
49.05
49.05
24.47
20.58
24.47
20.58
24.47
20.58
20.58
20.58
86.22
45.66
86.22
76.34
76.34
86.22
86.22

5.20
24.47
2.09
76.34
5.20
11.83
11.83
45.66
11.83
76.34
76.34
45.66
24.47
24.47
24.47
0.26
2.09
11.83
24.47

11.83
11.83
20.58
5.20
45.66
86.22
0.32
86.22
20.58
49.05
49.05
86.22
86.22
76.34
45.66
24.47
0.32
5.20
11.83

0.02
0.02
5.20
0.00
0.08
0.01
0.08
0.77
0.08
0.26
5.20
2.09
5.20
0.01
0.08
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.00

0.02
0.01
0.26
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.26
0.01
0.08
5.20
5.20
2.09
0.02
0.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.26
0.00
0.02
0.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.08
0.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Table B.7: p–values of the unconditional coverage test of Kupiec (1995) for the conﬁdence level τ = 1%. For each sector, in bold we denote the
rejections of the null hypothesis at 5% conﬁdence level.

τ = 1%

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

τ = 0.1%

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manifacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

2
8

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
1.31
12.65
1.31
18.91
0.85
2.60
0.77
52.43
6.15
7.27
0.77
36.57
36.57
30.23
0.11
0.01
1.10
0.29
0.00
0.08
2.13
23.82
0.44
0.03
0.00
0.12
0.77
7.40
0.77
0.24
14.83
36.35
54.70
7.40
57.22
18.91
0.00
52.43

1.31
0.00
0.00
18.91
7.40
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.29
0.02
17.27
0.03
0.00
1.31
0.12
70.72
7.40
24.27
3.58

0.29
0.00
0.00
59.30
0.27
4.55
24.27
0.05
0.54
0.02
9.28
0.06
11.50
2.13
0.06
55.41
18.91
0.56
0.01

1.31
0.00
0.00
14.28
0.00
0.00
30.23
0.29
1.99
0.04
0.00
0.03
0.00
3.34
0.44
36.35
10.45
0.00
0.07

9.28
30.23
1.32
59.30
29.23
51.51
49.15
1.60
20.44
0.01
43.89
0.12
0.06
2.60
5.06
22.28
36.57
64.54
0.06

12.65
14.28
0.85
64.54
51.51
10.45
42.99
0.06
9.28
0.15
13.85
0.44
0.24
5.06
0.77
22.28
30.23
59.30
0.14

36.57
20.80
0.04
47.00
3.16
1.46
52.43
0.64
1.99
0.54
29.23
0.01
0.58
23.82
3.34
8.14
13.85
41.64
0.45

12.65
3.16
4.31
64.54
3.58
55.41
59.30
17.27
13.85
0.01
18.45
0.27
0.58
63.69
10.45
16.97
11.50
16.97
0.00

42.99
64.54
4.23
41.23
20.44
3.71
23.86
22.28
13.85
0.85
43.89
7.27
2.60
23.82
10.45
18.40
61.07
52.43
0.19

0.77
0.24
0.03
0.77
10.45
3.34
7.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.24
0.01
0.00
0.12
0.12
7.40
1.31
36.57
6.15

0.29
0.04
0.10
5.06
18.91
3.34
3.34
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.03
0.01
0.00
5.06
0.24
14.28
5.06
14.28
16.20

17.27
10.45
0.54
42.99
5.06
2.13
5.06
12.65
0.06
0.06
0.12
10.45
0.01
10.45
2.13
24.27
2.13
52.43
0.24

29.23
54.70
22.06
62.65
18.45
47.00
59.30
12.65
70.72
0.52
49.15
7.40
2.60
57.22
5.06
18.40
42.99
9.33
1.83

18.91
49.15
20.80
30.23
23.82
10.45
62.65
10.45
43.89
1.60
30.23
2.13
0.01
64.54
5.06
1.26
49.15
47.00
0.27

70.72
1.10
6.15
70.72
36.57
36.57
10.45
9.28
0.15
0.12
3.34
14.28
2.13
29.23
5.06
70.72
10.45
29.79
0.00

22.82
59.30
14.83
42.99
23.21
24.27
59.30
1.44
13.85
0.94
30.23
5.06
0.06
64.54
5.06
3.05
49.15
41.23
0.65

0.77
3.34
0.31
0.44
8.97
2.13
24.27
0.18
0.54
0.01
2.13
0.01
0.01
3.34
0.06
58.80
10.45
24.27
64.89

3.34
0.00
0.00
5.06
5.06
42.99
30.23
0.29
8.97
0.00
10.45
0.03
0.01
1.31
0.12
29.23
14.28
49.15
55.41

58.80
4.55
8.97
42.99
62.65
30.23
36.57
1.99
0.06
0.24
0.77
14.28
5.06
5.52
2.13
36.57
42.99
5.13
0.05

22.82
7.40
55.41
14.28
18.91
5.06
7.40
8.97
0.03
0.06
0.06
3.34
0.12
18.91
0.77
24.27
3.34
41.23
3.19

18.91
54.70
67.65
19.85
5.98
54.70
0.12
70.72
2.13
7.40
1.44
29.23
10.45
19.85
7.40
5.57
18.91
0.37
0.00

7.40
24.27
1.99
36.57
36.35
24.27
62.65
1.60
43.89
0.29
18.91
0.24
0.12
1.31
5.06
76.75
42.99
64.89
23.25

5.06
14.28
2.89
0.24
22.82
7.40
24.27
0.52
0.31
0.02
5.06
0.44
0.06
0.77
0.44
58.80
24.27
42.99
42.99

14.28
36.57
14.28
7.40
64.89
3.34
0.03
0.15
0.00
0.12
0.44
0.01
0.06
2.13
0.01
52.43
0.44
64.89
12.70

5.06
5.06
17.27
0.44
43.89
3.34
36.57
0.44
0.54
0.01
2.60
0.03
0.01
3.34
0.44
70.72
36.57
30.23
54.70

10.45
18.91
0.77
7.40
62.65
5.06
0.00
2.60
0.00
0.24
0.00
0.00
0.06
3.34
0.00
15.73
0.00
63.69
23.33

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN
14.85
6.78
50.26
14.85
2.80
29.10
2.80
6.78
1.05
6.78
2.80
6.78
0.36
29.10
98.14
29.10
0.36
14.85
98.14
6.78
6.78
6.78
98.14
29.10
75.17
50.26
2.80
29.10
1.05
29.10
0.01
0.03
1.05
6.78
14.85
50.26
0.36
0.03

1.05
14.85
6.78
14.85
14.85
29.10
14.85
50.26
1.05
0.19
2.80
50.26
50.26
14.85
29.10
0.36
6.78
50.26
2.80

0.12
0.03
0.09
0.00
0.03
0.01
0.12
0.09
0.03
0.36
14.85
14.85
6.78
0.12
1.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.12
0.67
0.01
0.36
0.03
0.36
0.19
0.36
1.05
14.85
6.78
14.85
0.03
0.36
0.03
0.00
0.12
0.00

1.05
0.00
0.00
0.36
1.05
0.00
0.12
29.10
0.36
14.85
14.85
29.10
29.10
1.05
0.36
0.12
1.05
29.10
0.01

2.80
14.85
0.09
6.78
0.36
14.85
1.05
0.67
0.36
29.10
2.80
50.26
50.26
2.80
1.05
0.12
2.80
6.78
0.12

1.05
0.00
0.00
6.78
0.00
0.00
0.12
29.10
0.12
29.10
0.00
29.10
0.00
1.05
2.80
0.00
2.80
0.00
0.00

1.05
0.00
0.00
2.80
1.05
0.00
0.00
0.38
0.12
29.10
6.78
50.26
29.10
1.05
2.80
0.03
2.80
29.10
0.03

0.12
0.00
0.38
0.03
1.05
0.36
0.12
14.85
1.05
1.05
29.10
2.80
6.78
0.36
2.80
0.36
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.12
0.12
0.01
0.12
2.80
0.36
0.36
6.78
1.05
1.05
14.85
14.85
29.10
0.01
6.78
0.36
0.12
0.36
0.12

0.36
0.00
0.00
1.05
0.00
0.00
0.36
0.38
0.36
29.10
2.80
50.26
0.12
2.80
2.80
0.00
2.80
0.00
0.01

0.36
1.05
6.78
0.03
0.00
14.85
98.14
0.01
50.26
14.85
0.00
75.17
50.26
0.12
29.10
0.00
1.05
0.00
0.00

29.10
14.85
6.78
29.10
6.78
50.26
29.10
50.26
6.78
95.02
50.26
75.17
50.26
29.10
6.78
2.80
6.78
50.26
1.05

29.10
50.26
14.85
2.80
14.85
14.85
29.10
98.14
14.85
95.02
6.78
98.14
75.17
29.10
29.10
0.12
29.10
29.10
0.36

50.26
98.14
15.16
95.02
50.26
78.68
95.02
15.16
95.02
44.88
98.14
44.88
98.14
78.68
98.14
95.02
98.14
98.14
98.14

95.02
95.02
78.68
75.17
98.14
78.68
44.88
44.88
78.68
78.68
95.02
98.14
78.68
78.68
98.14
98.14
44.88
98.14
75.17

29.10
50.26
29.10
75.17
29.10
29.10
75.17
98.14
50.26
98.14
98.14
98.14
75.17
50.26
75.17
1.05
29.10
50.26
95.02

75.17
98.14
78.68
78.68
50.26
44.88
50.26
44.88
50.26
44.88
44.88
44.88
98.14
75.17
98.14
95.02
95.02
98.14
98.14

14.85
50.26
6.78
95.02
14.85
29.10
29.10
75.17
29.10
95.02
95.02
75.17
50.26
50.26
50.26
1.05
6.78
29.10
50.26

29.10
29.10
44.88
14.85
75.17
98.14
1.28
98.14
44.88
78.68
78.68
98.14
98.14
95.02
75.17
50.26
1.28
14.85
29.10

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.01
0.12
1.05
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.36
1.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.01
0.12
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

-

Table B.8: p–values of the conditional coverage test of Christoﬀersen (1998) for τ = 1%. For each sector, in bold we denote the rejections of the
null hypothesis at 5% conﬁdence level.

τ = 1%

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

MSE MIV
Commercial services
8.44
18.52
Communications
27.91
7.03
1.50
Consumer durables
11.68
Consumer non-durables 13.50
45.35
Consumer services
87.30
30.22
Distribution services
37.85
14.40
Electronic Technology
0.00
47.60
0.80
Energy Minerals
8.88
0.00
4.59
Finance
2.06
0.22
Health Services
0.02
Health Technology
23.64
0.57
2.29
Industrial Services
3.56
0.31
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
13.83
30.90
0.34
Producer Manifacturing
7.32
Retail Trade
18.71
48.46
Technology Services
0.00
22.67
Transportation
85.98
52.03
Utilities
86.12
27.41

MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV
11.78
14.04
49.27
14.10
0.30
21.74
9.34
45.34
89.54
37.06
30.83
24.66
0.00
46.27
0.93
0.17
0.00
6.80
1.27
0.42
10.57
22.55
0.94
1.48
3.56
1.51
30.98
24.56
0.12
3.48
28.72
46.10
8.03
29.23
84.41
70.26
86.59
17.89

36.28
6.89
45.01
9.74
76.54
30.88
48.92
1.75
5.77
0.41
17.10
2.26
1.28
30.92
9.80
10.93
56.79
55.51
76.78

26.87
0.00
0.00
20.42
28.85
13.01
33.12
3.94
13.63
0.22
41.79
2.27
0.61
17.22
4.84
14.78
55.01
89.44
6.47

2.74
0.00
0.00
91.81
0.00
0.00
36.20
0.06
5.76
0.73
10.79
3.57
0.03
21.69
3.44
30.63
35.18
0.00
0.00

34.21
0.22
0.00
50.79
0.14
18.71
38.76
28.09
2.04
0.02
17.40
0.00
0.02
86.43
22.37
2.44
0.07
0.00
0.00

73.73
29.00
0.00
79.52
0.33
0.36
79.22
0.00
2.12
0.03
64.05
0.00
0.02
19.49
30.93
1.94
0.21
0.53
0.25

0.00
69.26
31.24
18.76
5.09
0.00
0.00
3.48
10.22
24.72
0.00
0.00
52.93
23.12
0.00
0.00
27.89
0.01
0.00

57.40
73.57
21.81
84.59
25.23
73.77
16.27
0.04
15.51
9.69
57.94
36.93
3.40
76.76
37.93
4.58
77.58
1.21
2.11

65.91
53.28
13.89
39.60
20.88
6.23
7.22
24.21
14.78
0.63
89.97
45.36
8.81
87.52
37.87
4.94
71.98
0.02
2.62

86.83
83.65
0.00
63.49
19.42
0.51
2.25
10.11
11.10
1.27
71.46
8.50
15.78
20.58
50.32
5.11
87.62
0.20
0.07

39.07
0.02
28.91
61.46
82.31
2.92
27.36
8.06
0.16
3.78
22.07
21.66
2.91
48.25
0.49
0.11
52.90
25.41
0.00

0.00
61.80
6.10
79.16
0.00
53.02
17.42
20.27
0.00
3.76
61.01
0.00
1.47
69.02
37.72
2.94
77.31
0.00
0.78

13.01
45.63
6.65
79.02
37.44
5.38
36.66
26.27
3.07
3.14
4.51
29.07
0.49
41.91
0.17
0.01
24.58
84.40
0.02

29.48
40.77
52.23
52.33
32.22
15.91
38.92
21.55
1.94
3.21
3.31
25.23
2.20
67.46
0.05
0.01
29.89
71.05
0.33

16.56
0.00
0.00
61.76
36.13
0.00
0.00
6.09
3.89
0.74
43.16
2.34
0.31
15.89
4.97
19.00
17.31
59.72
0.07

15.35
0.00
0.00
43.42
0.00
0.00
24.23
0.94
0.47
1.16
0.00
2.20
0.00
27.64
10.13
8.55
26.92
0.00
0.00

40.33
0.27
35.85
77.31
68.55
3.06
47.96
1.68
0.57
6.81
11.39
32.23
32.37
4.97
0.16
4.35
71.44
11.30
0.00

τ = 0.1%

2
9

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manifacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

EGARCH

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

GED

Gaussian

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

EGARCH

MSE MIV
6.88
18.61
67.82
39.30
3.41
93.74
3.52
40.56
0.62
98.51
100.00
18.44
0.14
0.00
100.00
64.11
0.28
49.44
1.40
99.46
99.46
14.16
100.00
66.63
100.00
75.22
99.98
6.46
0.94
98.51
0.00
89.30
1.19
0.00
21.62
40.58
0.01
67.65

MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV MN MSE MIV
13.22
6.54
99.98
40.38
0.00
99.46
98.51
8.26
0.15
100.00
99.46
39.30
0.88
80.73
0.00
93.68
0.24
79.83
99.46
64.14
99.98
5.07
100.00
89.17
99.46
78.15
99.46
6.55
1.16
100.00
0.00
100.00
4.05
93.13
14.41
100.00
0.05
98.47

1.36
0.00
0.00
18.68
0.00
0.00
0.01
66.94
0.03
31.75
0.00
60.11
0.00
1.54
2.92
0.00
1.81
0.00
0.00

1.68
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.37
0.00
0.01
66.88
0.24
19.81
19.05
54.16
37.99
1.14
0.15
0.00
0.87
33.68
0.00

0.21
0.00
0.00
1.42
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.31
64.00
5.40
89.17
0.00
5.11
1.61
0.00
2.37
0.00
0.00

0.01
0.01
0.00
0.05
3.22
0.01
0.33
4.85
1.00
0.00
39.58
14.07
32.63
0.00
15.65
0.19
0.06
0.33
0.04

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.34
0.00
0.21
0.00
0.19
0.00
40.20
0.23
18.07
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00

1.59
0.00
0.00
6.38
0.17
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
66.65
13.43
88.73
52.24
1.03
1.58
0.00
2.86
32.24
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.08
0.00
0.05
0.18
0.98
0.00
66.81
2.83
9.91
0.11
3.14
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
37.43
1.48
0.25
0.00
1.20
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
1.75
18.64
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
89.10
40.57
0.00
0.00
89.30
0.05
67.81
0.00
1.74
0.00
0.00

40.62
89.19
4.67
99.95
10.48
65.81
34.66
96.70
66.17
98.92
99.97
98.42
72.57
89.24
81.85
0.78
9.02
44.23
83.91

0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
1.64
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

MN MSE MIV
7.43
37.57
6.04
21.00
0.04
1.14
6.49
13.50
42.59
58.30
13.24
45.38
28.14
44.46
0.04
0.41
0.48
0.39
0.25
0.73
5.71
36.79
0.48
10.53
0.14
3.35
13.02
5.04
4.39
10.35
16.59
44.08
17.88
46.98
54.03
80.33
63.40
16.25

30.27
26.25
1.48
39.92
60.28
61.96
37.84
3.50
22.53
4.74
49.71
6.05
0.62
13.76
34.33
3.12
57.56
74.03
1.61

MN MSE MIV
0.38
23.49
0.27
16.00
0.16
0.48
85.58
35.90
60.30
53.82
10.44
41.46
29.67
50.26
0.03
0.00
0.31
3.93
0.21
3.13
2.15
14.71
0.39
9.99
0.02
7.30
30.39
19.01
0.01
13.46
1.76
2.57
37.79
41.38
38.26
71.77
0.00
17.23

0.27
35.53
0.85
50.80
53.22
20.23
42.08
3.11
2.45
0.00
22.71
4.70
2.85
8.28
35.18
0.01
51.75
77.90
0.00

Student–t

GJR-GARCH

GARCH

MN MSE MIV
93.33
64.36
89.59
89.27
92.37
16.47
99.45
98.43
79.47
37.47
91.89
63.80
87.91
90.11
93.70
97.72
89.27
55.01
77.98
99.98
91.74
99.94
93.68
99.36
73.66
79.87
91.30
86.31
99.18
93.28
0.09
99.88
99.97
46.20
60.34
100.00
99.94
97.23

64.37
32.54
4.06
43.24
1.20
13.73
28.29
82.81
6.39
99.97
40.81
98.52
75.71
52.44
7.90
0.28
4.92
48.96
0.10

MN MSE MIV
6.06
61.50
78.34
88.21
74.99
5.51
99.66
6.08
83.20
11.77
99.46
9.41
99.96
36.19
75.96
98.17
39.40
98.15
66.46
99.85
99.34
13.07
93.22
99.58
31.05
72.92
90.83
41.37
97.84
50.99
0.00
99.92
100.00
40.98
31.12
99.99
0.12
100.00

0.08
30.19
4.21
31.24
10.50
5.30
16.66
78.42
0.81
0.00
0.12
88.90
66.97
32.09
62.35
0.00
6.17
49.86
1.00

MN
6.27
20.70
0.20
79.91
4.36
68.54
37.88
0.00
0.03
2.02
22.46
10.17
4.52
39.88
12.48
0.33
66.06
52.66
0.00

MN
36.86
80.74
16.74
18.49
3.17
0.79
39.19
98.77
36.30
99.99
16.67
99.53
71.27
42.10
52.44
0.00
8.52
57.86
0.27

Table B.9: Out–of–sample Dynamic Quantile (DQ) test of Engle and Manganelli (2004), for τ = 1%. For each sector, in bold we denote rejections
of the null hypothesis at 5% conﬁdence level.

τ

Sector

Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

A/E

AD

1%

0.1%

1%

0.1%

MIV MSE MN MIV MSE MN MIV MSE MN MIV MSE MN

0.72
0.75
0.72
0.78
0.79
0.83
0.71
0.88

–

0.51

–

0.66
0.63
0.84
0.61
0.98
0.69
1.10
1.33

–
–
–

–
–
–

0.79
0.83

–

0.89
0.87

–

0.88

0.90

–

–

0.59

0.76

–

–

0.75

0.83

–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–

0.82

0.84

–
–

–
–

1.63
1.00
1.75
3.00
2.71
2.58
2.75
1.75
2.67
2.21
1.71
1.79
1.80
2.34
1.00
2.64
3.17
3.04
2.84

–
–
–

2.33
2.60

–

2.60
2.47
2.92
2.00
2.10
2.07

–

–
–
–

2.50
2.96

–

2.35
1.71
2.71
1.54
2.57
1.68

–

2.75

2.81

–

3.38
2.63
1.94
3.15

–

3.58
2.46
2.00
3.17

0.53
1.01
0.50
0.28
0.80
1.37
0.69
0.71

–

0.59

–

0.40
1.50
0.47
0.45
0.42
0.68
0.48
0.35

–
–
–

–
–
–

0.31
0.89

–

0.32
0.89

–

1.17

1.16

–

–

0.60

0.61

–

–

0.32

0.31

–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–
–

0.97

0.97

–
–

–
–

0.34
0.68
0.20
0.18
0.64
1.23
0.52
0.50
0.48
0.36
0.16
0.24
1.16
0.27
0.10
0.28
0.54
0.34
0.22

–
–
–

0.19
0.71

–

0.97
0.67
0.49
0.42
0.14
0.31

–

–
–
–

0.20
0.69

–

0.92
0.73
0.45
0.65
0.16
0.45

–

0.35

0.54

–

0.29
0.81
0.36
0.26

–

0.31
0.81
0.34
0.27

3
0

Table B.10: A/E exceedances ratio and maximum AD averaged across the optimal MCS, ˆM∗
means that no models remained in the MCS at the end of the procedure. The maximum AD values are reported in percentage points.

1−α, grouped by regressors and conﬁdence levels: “–”

τ

1%

0.1%

1%

0.1%

ADMax

ADMean

3
1

Sector
Commercial services
Communications
Consumer durables
Consumer non-durables
Consumer services
Distribution services
Electronic Technology
Energy Minerals
Finance
Health Services
Health Technology
Industrial Services
Non-Energy Minerals
Process Industries
Producer Manifacturing
Retail Trade
Technology Services
Transportation
Utilities

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

0.367

1.010

1.664

0.183

0.774
1.372
1.887
1.722
1.356
1.145

0.299
0.851
1.333
0.956
0.728
0.600

VaRdyn VaRavg VaRdyn VaRavg VaRdyn VaRavg VaRdyn VaRavg
0.247
0.250
0.253
0.244
0.249
0.246
0.252
0.255
0.248
0.246
0.246
0.250
0.266
0.248
0.249
0.249

0.133
0.217
0.168
0.085
0.147
0.124
0.209
0.156
0.164
0.158
0.085
0.146
0.344
0.121
0.118
0.106

0.877
1.516
1.038
0.577
1.203
1.733
1.553
1.217
1.006
0.828
0.677
0.818
2.513
0.868
0.898
0.810

0.511
0.995
0.546
0.300
0.844
1.378
0.934
0.745
0.608
0.646
0.285
0.453
1.461
0.450
0.415
0.428

0.085
0.145
0.119
0.197
0.148
0.142

0.362
0.366
0.364
0.369
0.370
0.364

0.086

0.219

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

0.287

0.845

1.490

2.661

0.363

0.379

0.366
0.366
0.366

0.436
0.450
0.741

1.065
0.977
1.472

–

–

0.346

0.880

0.107
0.110
0.201

–

0.453
0.338

–

0.873
0.712

–

–

0.067

0.365

–

0.087
0.082

–

0.249
0.248

Table B.11: Comparison between the dynamic VaR combination VaRdynamic and the static average VaRavg in terms of mean and maximum AD
at both the considered conﬁdence level τ = 1% and τ = 0.1%. All values expressed in percentage points. The symbol “–” means that there remains
only one model in the SSM.

Appendix C. Figures

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

−0.02

−0.025

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

−0.02

−0.025

−0.03

−0.035

−0.04

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0.01

0

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04

−0.05

−0.06

−0.07

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

−0.02

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Figure C.1: Time series plot of the log–returns (grey bullets) along with the estimated
VaR at τ = 1% for diﬀerent sectors: communications (upper, left), utilities (upper, right),
distribution services (bottom, left), health technology (bottom, right). In all panels, thin lines
denote VaR forecast delivered by individual models VaRτ
j,t+1|t, ∀j = 1, 2, . . . , M0, while the
grey dotted line denotes the VaRτ,avg
t+1|t obtained
by averaging the model speciﬁcations belonging to the MCS set M∗

t+1|t and the red dotted line denotes the VaRτ,dyn

1−α.

32

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

−10

−12

−3

x 10

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

−10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

−3

x 10

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

−0.005

−0.01

−0.015

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Figure C.2: Time series plot of the log–returns (grey bullets) along with the estimated
VaR at τ = 1% for diﬀerent sectors: communications (upper, left), utilities (upper, right),
distribution services (bottom, left), health technology (bottom, right). In all panels the grey
dotted line denotes the VaRτ,avg
t+1|t obtained by
averaging all the model speciﬁcations in the initial set M0, and the dark dotted line denotes
the VaRτ,dyn
1−α.

t+1|t obtained by averaging the model speciﬁcations belonging to the MCS set M∗

t+1|t, the red dotted line denotes the VaRτ,dyn

33

References

Aiolfi, M., Capistr´an C. and Timmermann, A., (2011). Forecast Combi-
nations. In The Oxford Handbook of Economic Forecasting, edited by Michael
P. Clements and David F. Hendry (eds). Oxford University Press, pp. 355–
390.

Berry, T.D. and Howe, K.M., (1994). Public information arrival. The

Journal of Finance, 49, pp. 1331–1346.

Black, F., (1976) Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes, In Proceedings of
the 1976 American Statistical Association, Business and Economical Statis-
tics Section, Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association, pp. 177–181.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, (1996). Supervisory frame-
work for the use of “backtesting” in conjunction with the internal models
approach to market risk capital requirements. BIS: Basel.

Bates, J.M. and Granger, C.W.J., (1969). The combination of forecasts.

Operations Research Quarterly, 20, pp. 451–468.

Blasco, N., Corredor, P. and Santamara, R., (2002).

Is bad news
cause of asymmetric volatility response? A note. Applied Economics, 34, pp.
1227–1231.

Bollerslev, T., (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedas-

ticity. Journal of Econometrics, 31, pp. 307–327.

Chen, C.W.S., Gerlach, R., Lin, E.M.H., and Lee, W.C.W., (2012).
Bayesian forecasting for ﬁnancial risk management, pre and post the global
ﬁnancial crisis. Journal of Forecasting, 31, pp. 661–687.

Clark, P., (1973). A subordinated stochastic process model with ﬁnite vari-

ance for speculative prices. Econometrica, 41, pp. 135–155.

Chopra, N., Lakonishok, J. and Ritter, J., (1992). Measuring abnormal
performance: do stocks overreact? Journal of Financial Economics, 31, pp.
235–259.

Christoffersen, P. (1998). Evaluating interval forecasts. International Eco-

nomic Review, 39, pp. 841–862.

Christoffersen, P., Hahn, J. and Inoue, A., (1999). Testing, Comparing
and Combining Value at Risk Measures. The Wharton school University Of
Pennsylvania. Working paper n. 44.

Das, S.R., (2011). News analytics:

framework, techniques and metrics. In
The Handbook of News Analytics in Finance, edited by Gautam Mitra and
Leela Mitra (eds). John Wiley & Sons, pp. 43–72.

34

DeBondt, W., and Thaler, R., (1985). Does the stock market overreact?

Journal of Finance, 40, pp. 793–805.

DeGennaro, R.P. and Shrieves, R.E, (1997). Public information releases,
private information arrival and volatility in the foreign exchange market.
Journal of Empirical Finance, 4, pp. 295–315.

De Luca G. and Loperfido N., (2004). A skew-in-mean GARCH model for
ﬁnancial returns. In Skew-Elliptical Distributions and Their Applications: a
Journey Beyond Normality, Genton, M.G. (Ed.), CRC/Chapman & Hall, pp.
205–222.

Ederington, L.H. and Lee, J.H., (1993). How markets process information:

news releases and volatility. The Journal of Finance, 48, pp. 1161–119.

Engle, R.F. and Manganelli, S., (2004). CAViaR: Conditional autoregres-
sive value at risk by regression quantiles. Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 22, pp. 367–381.

Engle, R.F., (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with es-
timates of the variance of united kingdom inﬂation. Econometrica, 50, pp.
987–1008.

Fama, E.F., (1969). Eﬃcient capital market: a review of theory and empirical

work. The Journal of Finance, 25, 383–417.

Fern´andez, C. and Steel, M.F.J., (1998). On Bayesian modeling of fat
tails and skewness Journal of the American Statistical Association, 93, pp.
359–371.

Fornaria, F., Monticelli, C., Pericoli, M. and Tivegna, M., (2002).
The impact of news on the exchange rate of the lira and long-term interest
rates. Economic Modelling, 19, pp. 611–639.

Francq, C. and Zako¨ıan, J.M., (2010). GARCH Models, structure, esti-

mation and Finance applications. John Wiley & Sons.

Genc¸ay, R., Dacorogna, M., Muller, U.A., Pictet, O., Olsen, R.,

(2001). An introduction to high–frequency ﬁnance. Academic Press.

Giacomini, R. and Komunjer, I., (2005). Evaluation and combination of
conditional quantile forecasts. Journal of Business & Economic statistics, 23,
pp. 416–431.

Glosten, L.R., Jagannathan, R. and Runkle, D.E., (1993). On the
relation between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess
return on stock. Journal of Finance, 48, pp. 1779–1801.

35

Gonzalez-Rivera, G., Lee, T.H., and Mishra, S. (2004). Forecasting
volatility: A reality check based on option pricing, utility function, value–
at–risk, and predictive likelihood. International Journal of Forecasting, 20,
629–645

Hafez, P.A., (2009). Construction of Market Sentiment Indices Using News

Sentiment. RavenPack International S.L..

Hansen, P. R.

Asymptotic Tests of Composite Hypothe-
ses, Working Paper 03–09, Brown University Economics, available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=399761.

(2003).

Hansen, P. R. and Lunde, A., (2005). A forecast comparison of volatility
models: does anything beat a GARCH(1,1)? Journal of Applied Economet-
rics, 20, pp. 873–889.

Hansen, P.R., Lunde, A., Nason, J.M. (2011). The Model Conﬁdence Set.

Econometrica, 79, pp. 453-497.

Hoeting, J.A., Madigan, D., Raftery, A.E. and Volinsky, C.T.,
(1999). Bayesian model averaging: a tutorial. Statistical Science, 14, pp.
382–417.

Ito, T. and Roley, V., (1986). News from the U.S. and Japan: which moves

the Yen/Dollar exchange rate? NBER Working Paper No. 1853.

Jones, C.M., Lamont, O. and Lumsdaine, R.L., (1998). Macroeconomic
news and bond market volatility. Journal of Financial Economics, 47, pp.
315–337.

Kalev, P.S., Liu, W.-M., Pham, P.K. and Jarnecic, E., (2004). Pub-
lic information arrival and volatility of intraday stock returns. Journal of
Banking & Finance, 28, pp. 1441–1467.

Kalev, P.S. and Duong, H.N., (2011). Firm–speciﬁc news arrival and the
volatility of intraday stock index and futures returns. In The Handbook of
News Analytics in Finance, edited by Gautam Mitra and Leela Mitra (eds).
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 299–288.

Kim, S.J., (1998). Do Australian and the US macroeconomic news announce-
ments aﬀect the USD/AUD exchange rate? Some evidence from E–GARCH
estimations. Journal of Multinational Financial Management, 8, pp. 233–248.

Koppel, M. and Shtrimberg, I., (2004). Good News or Bad News? Let

the Market Decide. Working Paper.

Kotz, S., Kozubowski, T.J. and Podg´orski, K. (2001), The Laplace dis-
tribution and generalizations. A revisit with Applications to Communications,
Economics, Engineering, and Finance, Birkh¨auser.

36

Kupiec, P.H., (1995). Techniques for verifying the accuracy of risk measure-

ment models. Journal of Derivates, 3, pp. 73–84.

Lamoureux, C.G. and Lastrapes, W.D., (1990). Heteroskedasticity in
stock return data: volume versus GARCH eﬀects. The Journal of Finance,
45, pp. 221–229.

Lehmann, B., (1990). Fads, martingales, and market eﬃciency, Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 105, pp. 1–28.

McAleer, M. and da Veiga, B., (2008). Single–index and portfolio models
for forecasting value–at–risk thresholds. Journal of Forecasting, 27, pp. 217–
235.

Mitchell, M.L. and Harold, J., (1994). The impact of public information
on the stock market. The Journal of Finance, 49, pp. 923–950. Papers and
Proceedings of the Fifty–Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Finance
Association, Boston, Massachusetts, January 3–5.

Mitra, G. and Mitra, L., (2010). Handbook of news analytics in ﬁnance,

http://site.ebrary.com/lib/karachi/docDetail.action?docID=10488518.
Wiley Series in Finance, John Wiley & Sons.

Nelson, D.B., (1991). Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: a new

approach. Econometrica, 59, pp. 347–370.

Reid, D.J., (1968). Combining three estimates of gross domestic product.

Economica, 35, pp. 431–444.

Reid, D.J., (1969). A comparative study of time series prediction techniques

on economic data. Ph.D. Thesis University of Nottingham, Nottingham.

Sriram, K., Ramamoorthi, R.W. and Ghosh, P. (2013). Posterior Consis-
tency of Bayesian Quantile Regression Based on the Misspecﬁed Asymmetric
Laplace Density. Bayesian Analysis, 8, pp. 479–504.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M., (1999). Forecasting inﬂation. Journal of

Monetary Economics, 44, pp. 293–335.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M., (2001). A comparison of linear and nonlin-
ear univariate models for forecasting macroeconomic time Series. In Coin-
tegration, Causality, and Forecasting A Festschrift in Honour of Clive W.J.
Granger R.F. Engle and H. White (eds.), Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Stock, J.H. and Watson, M., (2004). Combination forecasts of output
growth in a seven–country data set. Journal of Forecasting, 23, pp. 405–430.

Timmermann, A., (2006). Forecast Combination. In Graham Elliott, Clive
W.J. Granger and Allan Timmermann (eds.), Handbook of Economic Fore-
casting. Elsevier, pp. 135–196.

37

